Paper: signac 2021 (draft) (#7)
bdice/scipy_proceedings: papers/bradley_dice/55_bradley_dice.rst

:author: Bradley D. Dice
:email: bdice@umich.edu
:institution: Department of Physics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

:author: Brandon L. Butler
:email: butlerbr@umich.edu
:institution: Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

:author: Vyas Ramasubramani
:email: vramasub@umich.edu
:institution: Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

:author: Alyssa Travitz
:email: atravitz@umich.edu

> :institution: TODO Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Author: @atravitz Can you update this with how you'd like your department to be listed?

:author: Michael M. Henry
:email: mikehenry@u.boisestate.edu
:institution: Micron School of Materials Science and Engineering, Boise State University

:author: Hardik Ojha
:email: hojha@ee.iitr.ac.in

> :institution: TODO Department, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee

Author: @kidrahahjo Can you update this with how you'd like your institution/department to be listed?

:author: Carl S. Adorf
:email: TODO

> :institution: TODO

Author: @csadorf Can you update this with how you'd like your institution/department to be listed?

:author: Sharon C. Glotzer
:email: sglotzer@umich.edu
:institution: Department of Physics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
:institution: Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
:institution: Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
:institution: Biointerfaces Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

:bibliography: paper

-------------------------------------------------------------------
signac: Data Management and Workflows for Computational Researchers
-------------------------------------------------------------------

.. class:: abstract

> The signac data management framework (https://signac.io) helps researchers execute reproducible computational studies, scaling from laptops to supercomputers and emphasizing portability and fast prototyping.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The signac data management framework (https://signac.io) helps researchers execute reproducible computational studies, scaling from laptops to supercomputers, and emphasizes portability and fast prototyping.
```

Author: Maybe this is a more parallel construction? @atravitz Please commit whichever change you prefer.
```suggestion
The signac data management framework (https://signac.io) helps researchers execute reproducible computational studies, scales workflows from laptops to supercomputers, and emphasizes portability and fast prototyping.
```

Reviewer 2: I prefer @bdice's suggestion.

    Next, users define a workflow using a subclass of signac-flow's ``FlowProject``.
    The workflow shown has three operations (simulate, analyze, visualize) that, when executed, produce two new files ``results.txt`` and ``plot.png`` in the job directory.

The full source code of all examples in this paper can be found online [#]_.

.. [#] https://github.com/glotzerlab/signac-examples

Research projects often address problems where questions change rapidly, data models are always in flux, and compute infrastructure varies widely from project to project.
The signac data management framework is a tool designed by researchers, for researchers, to make prototyping quick and reproducibility easy.
It forgoes serializing complex data files into a database in favor of working with these files directly, providing fast indexing utilities for a set of directories.
Using signac, a data space on the file system is easily initialized, searched, and modified using either a Python or command-line interface.
The companion package signac-flow interacts with the data space to generate and analyze data through reproducible workflows that easily scale from laptops to supercomputers.

> signac-flow can run arbitrary commands as part of a workflow, making it as flexible as a script in any language of choice.

Reviewer: capitalize or no?

Author: This sentence needs to be re-worked. We try to avoid the problem of questionable capitalization by not starting sentences with "signac" or "signac-flow." There is (or was) at least one other instance of this where a sentence starts with "Signac" (capitalized). I have a suggestion below but there might be a better way.
```suggestion
Arbitrary shell commands can be run by signac-flow as part of a workflow, making it as flexible as a script in any language of choice.
```

With signac, file-based data and metadata are organized in folders and JSON files, respectively (see Figure 1).

..
    TODO: Add figure label and update figure references -- Bradley couldn't get the paper to build after adding a label.

> A signac data space (or workspace) is composed of jobs, individual directories associated with a single primary key (or state point) stored in a file `signac_statepoint.json` in that directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A signac data space, or "workspace," is composed of jobs, which are individual directories associated with a single primary key known as a "state point" stored in a file `signac_statepoint.json` in that directory.
```

Signac uses these files to index the data space, providing a database-like interface to a collection of directories.

> Arbitrary user data may be stored in user-created-files in these jobs, although signac also provides convenient facilities for storing simple lightweight data or array-like data via JSON and HDF5 utilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Arbitrary user data may be stored in user-created files in these jobs, although signac also provides convenient facilities for storing simple lightweight data or array-like data via JSON and HDF5 utilities.
```

Readers seeking more detail on signac may refer to past signac papers: :cite:`signac_commat, signac_scipy_2018` as well as the signac website [#]_ and documentation [#]_.

.. [#] https://signac.io
.. [#] https://docs.signac.io

This filesystem-based approach has both advantages and disadvantages.
Its key advantages lie in flexibility and portability.
The serverless design removes the need for any external running server process, making it easy to operate on any arbitrary filesystem.
The design is also intrinsically distributed, making it well suited for highly-parallel workflows where each instance generates more file-based data.
Conversely, this distributed approach precludes performance advantages of centralized data stores with persistent indexes in memory.

> Typically, the signac approach works very well for projects up to 100,000 jobs, while significantly larger projects may have wait times that constrain interactive usage.

Reviewer: I remember a discussion where 100k jobs is actually a limitation of signac-flow, not of signac. @bdice is this correct should we mention this to be more precise?

Author: It's kind of the same for either package. Working with very large data spaces slows down iteration, querying, etc. and signac-flow's limitations are a result of signac's limitations. My brother recently created a workspace with 800k jobs and it was fine to add new jobs (constant time) but queries were not usable (linear time). He was able to convert his data into a MongoDB and it queries very fast, but at the cost of not being able to use signac-flow for workflow management...

The framework is a strong choice for applications involving file-based workflows, especially those that are quickly evolving or will run on HPC clusters, especially where the amount of required computation per job is large.
For example, (...TODO: insert examples of real world projects with scientific applications [HOOMD, MPB, etc], project sizes [100,000 jobs], number of jobs / number of terabytes).
Users working with large tabular data (e.g. flat files on disk or data from a SQL database) may prefer to use libraries like pandas, dask, or RAPIDS that are specifically designed for those use cases.
However, it is possible to create a signac project with state points corresponding to each row, which may be a good use of signac if there is file-based data affiliated with each row's parameters.

This paper will focus on developments to the signac framework over the last 3 years, during which features, flexibility, usability, and performance have been greatly improved.

> The core data structures in signac have been overhauled to provide a powerful, generic implementation of "synced collections," that we will leverage in future versions of signac to enable more performant data indexing and more flexible data layouts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The core data structures in signac have been overhauled to provide a powerful and generic implementation of "synced collections," that we will leverage in future versions of signac to enable more performant data indexing and flexible data layouts.
```

> In signac-flow, we have added support for submitting groups of operations with conditional dependencies, allowing for more efficient utilization of large HPC resources, and further developments allow for operations to act on arbitrary subsets of the data space rather than single jobs alone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In signac-flow, we have added support for submitting groups of operations with conditional dependencies, allowing for more efficient utilization of large HPC resources.
Further developments allow for operations to act on arbitrary subsets of the data space, or "aggregates," rather than single jobs alone.
```

> Meanwhile, performance enhancements have enabled scaling up to much larger data spaces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
This is already mentioned in the above paragraph

> Moving beyond code development, this paper will also discuss the scientific work these features have enabled, and key partnerships and affiliations with scientific software initiatives and organizations such as MoSDeF and NumFOCUS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moving beyond code development, this paper will also discuss the scientific work these features have enabled and the organizational developments from key partnerships and affiliations with scientific software initiatives and organizations such as MoSDeF and NumFOCUS.
```

We will share our project's experience in progressively revising project governance to catalyze sustained contributions of many kinds, while adding more points of entry for learning about the project (Slack support, office hours), and participating in Google Summer of Code in 2020 as a NumFOCUS Affiliated Project.

Applications of signac
----------------------

The signac framework has been cited 51 times, according to Google Scholar.

> The framework has been used in a range of scientific fields and with many types of computational workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The signac framework has been cited 51 times, according to Google Scholar, and has been used in a range of scientific fields with various types of computational workflows.
```

Some of these studies include quantum calculations of small molecules, screenings of ionic liquids and organic solvents, inverse design of pair potentials, optimizing photonic band gaps in colloidal materials, analyzing colloidal self-assembly with machine learning, and economic analysis of drought risk [no citation].
Much of the published research using signac comes from chemical engineering, materials science, or physics, the home fields of many of signac's core developers and thus fields where the project has had greater exposure.
In addition to social factors such as the "home field advantage," materials research commonly requires large HPC resources with shared file systems, a use case where signac excels.
However, there are many other fields with similar hardware needs where signac can be applied.

> These include simulation-heavy HPC workloads such as fluid dynamics, atomic/nuclear physics, or genomics; data-intensive fields such as economics or machine learning; and applications needing fast, flexible prototypes for optimization and data analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These include simulation-heavy HPC workloads such as fluid dynamics, atomic/nuclear physics, or genomics, data-intensive fields such as economics or machine learning, and applications needing fast, flexible prototypes for optimization and data analysis.
```

Operations in a FlowProject can define directives, which indicate hardware to request such as the number of processors or GPUs, the amount of memory, or the walltime needed to complete the operation.

..
    TODO Address redundancy with above content about processors/GPUs

These directives allow signac-flow to generate scripts for the currently present scheduler, enabling portability across HPC systems.
Moreover, signac-flow can combine operations and their directives in a number of ways, such as in serial or parallel bundles, or the new features for groups and aggregation discussed below.

..
    TODO Make sure to discuss bundling in the aggregation section. Avoid discussing serial/parallel bundles right here, because it hasn't been defined.

This allows users to leverage scheduler resources effectively and minimize queue time (or optimize for HPC policies that prefer large submissions) by bundling many operations into a small number of scheduler submissions.

..
    (TODO: Move this into the section above?) The framework emphasizes performance for common user workspaces and workflows.

> In early 2021, a significant portion of the codebase was profiled and refactored to improve performance, many of these are changes listed above.
> These improvements were released in signac v1.6.0 and signac-flow v0.12.0.
> Large signac projects saw 4-7x for operations such as iterating over the jobs in a project compared to the v1.5.0 release of signac.
> Similarly, performance of a sample workflow that checks status, runs, and submits a FlowProject with 1,000 jobs, 3 operations, and 2 label functions improved roughly 4x compared to the v0.11.0 release of signac-flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In early 2021, a significant portion of the codebase was profiled and refactored to improve performance, as described above, and these improvements were released in signac v1.6.0 and signac-flow v0.12.0.
As a result of these changes, large signac projects saw 4-7x for operations such as iterating over the jobs in a project compared to the v1.5.0 release of signac.
Similarly, performance of a sample workflow that checks status, runs, and submits a FlowProject with 1,000 jobs, 3 operations, and 2 label functions improved roughly 4x compared to the v0.11.0 release of signac-flow.
```

> Some signac developers have begun conversations with experimental researchers about how the framework might be useful for a broader range of research tasks, such as workflows that combine computational steps such as optimization or post processing with steps that might be performed (or manually triggered) by a researcher, such as the collection of data files from a microscope or robot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some signac developers have begun conversations with experimental researchers regarding how the signac framework might be useful for a broader range of research tasks.
Workflows that combine computational steps, such as optimization or post processing, with steps that might be performed (or manually triggered) by a researcher, such as the collection of data files from a microscope or robot, have complexities could benefit from the infrastructure signac's framework offers.
```

.. code-block:: python

    from flow import FlowProject

    new_group = FlowProject.make_group(
        name="new_group")

    @new_group.with_directives(
        {"ngpu": 2.0,
         "walltime": lambda j: j.sp.size * 4})
    @FlowProject.post.true("foo")
    @FlowProject.operation
    def foo(job):
        job.doc.foo = True

    @new_group
    @FlowProject.pre.true("foo")
    @FlowProject.post.true("bar")
    @FlowProject.operation
    def bar(job):
        job.doc.bar = True

> Groups also allow for specifying multiple machine specific resources (CPU v GPU) with the same operation. An operation can have unique directives for each group it is in. By associating an operation's directives with respect to a specific group, groups can represent distinct compute environments such as a local workstation or a remote supercomputing cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Groups also allow for specifying multiple machine specific resources (CPU or GPU) with the same operation.
An operation can have unique directives for each distinct group to which it belongs.
By associating an operation's directives with respect to a specific group, groups can represent distinct compute environments, such as a local workstation or a remote supercomputing cluster.
```

.. code-block:: python

    from flow import FlowProject

    cpu_env = FlowProject.make_group(name="cpu")
    gpu_env = FlowProject.make_group(name="gpu")

    @cpu_env.with_directives({"np": 48})
    @gpu_env.with_directives({"ngpu": 4})
    @FlowProject.operation
    def expensive_operation(job):
        # expensive computation for either
        # CPU or GPU here
        pass

> Users also frequently work with multiple jobs at once in a consistent manner.

Reviewer: what do you mean by "consistent manner"?

Reviewer 2: I had meant that the tasks were amenable to a structured workflow.

Though the signac package has methods like ``Project.groupby``, which can generate subsets of the project that are grouped by a state point key, there has been no similar feature in signac-flow to allow operations to act on multiple jobs.

> The concept of _aggregation_ provides a straightforward way for users to write and submit operations that act on arbitrary subsets of a signac data space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The concept of _aggregation_ provides a straightforward way for users to write and submit operations that act on arbitrary subsets of jobs in a signac data space.
```

> Just as groups act as an abstraction over operations, aggregation can be viewed as an abstraction over jobs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just as the groups feature acts as an abstraction over operations, aggregation can be viewed as an abstraction over jobs.
```

> The operation syntax changes from `def my_operation(job):` to `def my_operation(*jobs):`, using Python's argument unpacking syntax to support user input of one or more job instances (keeping backwards compatibility).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The operation syntax changes from `def my_operation(job):` to `def my_operation(*jobs):`, using Python's argument unpacking syntax to support user input of one or more job instances while maintaining backwards compatibility.
```

By organizing job directories by the hash of their state point, signac can perform many operations in constant time.
To present a Pythonic API, state points are exposed via a dictionary-like interface, making it very easy to modify a state point and have that change transparently reflected in both the JSON file and the name of the corresponding directory.

The need to parse these JSON files for indexing and the complexity of modifying them represent the most significant barriers to scaling signac.
Even in the absence of file modification, reading a large number of files simply to produce a database index becomes prohibitively expensive for large data spaces.
Although various optimizations have incrementally improved signac's scalability, an alternative means of storing the state point and associated metadata that circumvents the heavy I/O costs of our current approach has the potential to make a much larger impact.
However, replacing individual JSON files as the primary data source for signac without breaking signac's API required a generic method for providing the same interface to the underlying index and metadata files irrespective of the underlying storage mechanism.

> Once developed, however, such an API would abstract out enough of the internals of signac to enable other generalizations as well, such as making it relatively easy to support alternate (and nearly arbitrary) data space layouts.

Reviewer: the tense-switching here is confusing

Reviewer 2: I have attempted to fix this.

Summary of Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We designed synced collections to be flexible, easily extensible, and independent of the rest of signac.
The central element is the ``SyncedCollection`` class, which defines a new abstract class extending the ``collections.abc.Collection`` from the Python standard library.
A ``SyncedCollection`` is a ``Collection`` that adds two additional groups of abstract methods that must be implemented by its subclasses.
One group includes methods for synchronizing with an underlying resource, while the other contains methods for synchronizing with a standard collection of the underlying base type.
For instance, a ``JSONDict`` would implement the first set of methods to define how to save a dictionary to a JSON file and reload it, while it would implement the second set of methods to define how to convert between a ``JSONDict`` instance and a standard Python dictionary.

Critically, these two sets of functions are orthogonal.

> Therefore, it should be possible to implement different backend types and different data structures independently, then combine them after the fact.

Reviewer: what do you mean by "after the fact"? after when?

Author: ```suggestion
Therefore, it should be possible to implement different backend types and different data structures independently, then combine them into concrete classes using multiple inheritance.
```

For example, I'd expect our closest comparison for a Redis-backed dict to be pyredis itself, which offers a dictionary-like API.
I'd expect us to pretty much always be slower, but also to be much easier to work with and to support a lot more out-of-the-box (e.g.
nested objects, buffering, and composition of data structures that may require more internal plumbing otherwise).

Project Evolution
-----------------

The signac project has evolved from being an open-source project mostly developed and managed by the Glotzer Group at the University of Michigan, to being supported by over 30 contributors and committers/maintainers on 3 continents and with over 55 citations from academic and government research labs and 12 talks at large scientific, Python, and data science conferences.
The growth in involvement with signac is the result of our focus on developing features based on user needs, as well as our efforts to transition signac users to signac contributors, through many initiatives in the past few years.
Through encouraging users to become contributors, we ensure that signac addresses real users' needs.

..

>     TODO: mention GSoC

Reviewer: what more do we want to say about GSoC?

Reviewer 2: I am not sure I want to say too much more. Most people will be familiar with it, and I am not sure that we will have unique things to say about it, though we had a great experience with it.

:institution: Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

:author: Alyssa Travitz
:email: atravitz@umich.edu
:institution: Macromolecular Science and Engineering Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

:author: Michael M. Henry
:email: mikehenry@u.boisestate.edu
:institution: Micron School of Materials Science and Engineering, Boise State University

:author: Hardik Ojha
:email: hojha@ch.iitr.ac.in
:institution: Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee

:author: Carl S. Adorf
:email: TODO
:institution: Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

:author: Sharon C. Glotzer
:email: sglotzer@umich.edu
:institution: Department of Physics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
:institution: Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
:institution: Biointerfaces Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

:bibliography: paper

-------------------------------------------------------------------
signac: Data Management and Workflows for Computational Researchers
-------------------------------------------------------------------

.. class:: abstract

> The signac data management framework (https://signac.io) helps researchers execute reproducible computational studies, scales workflows from laptops to supercomputers, and emphasizes portability and fast prototyping.

Author: The previous SciPy proceedings paper used `signac` in `code font` throughout the paper. In our documentation, we use **signac** in **bold font.** How should we format the name of the project in this paper?

Reviewer 2: I would go with bold here. I can add.

Enhanced Workflows
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Directives: Directives provide a way to specify required resources on HPC schedulers such as number of CPUs/GPUs, MPI ranks, OpenMP threads, walltime, memory, and others. Directives can be a function of the job as well as the operation, allowing for great flexibility. In addition, directives work seamlessly with operation groups, job aggregation, and submission bundling (all of which are described in a later section).

Dynamic Workspaces: The signac-flow package can now handle workspaces where jobs are created as the result of operations on other jobs. This is crucial for optimization workflows and iteratively sampling parameter spaces, and allows projects to become more automated with some data points only run if a prior condition on another data point is reached.

Executing complex workflows via groups and aggregation
------------------------------------------------------

> .. figure:: signac-flow_aggregation-groups-bundling.pdf

Author: We need to reference this figure in the text somewhere.

This means that manipulating a job document or reading data can be done through a hybrid of bash/shell commands and Python commands that are fast to type.

.. code-block:: shell

    ~/project $ ls
    signac.rc workspace
    ~/project $ cd workspace/42b7b4f2921788e.../
    ~/project/workspace/42b7b4f2921788e... $ signac shell
    Python 3.8.3
    signac 1.6.0

    Project:        test
    Job:            42b7b4f2921788ea14dac5566e6f06d0
    Root:           ~/project
    Workspace:      ~/project/workspace
    Size:           1

    Interact with the project interface using the
    "project" or "pr" variable. Type "help(project)"
    or "help(signac)" for more information.

    >>> job.sp
    {'a': 1}

HDF5 support for storing numerical data: Many applications used in research generate or consume large numerical arrays.
For applications in Python, NumPy arrays are a de facto standard for in-memory representation and manipulation.
However, saving these arrays to disk and handling data structures that mix dictionaries and numerical arrays can be cumbersome.

> The signac H5Store feature offers users a convenient wrapper around the ``h5py`` library for loading and saving both hierarchical/key-value data and numerical array data in the widely-used HDF5 format.

Author: TODO: Cite h5py and HDF5 here.

    {'a': 1}

HDF5 support for storing numerical data: Many applications used in research generate or consume large numerical arrays.
For applications in Python, NumPy arrays are a de facto standard for in-memory representation and manipulation.
However, saving these arrays to disk and handling data structures that mix dictionaries and numerical arrays can be cumbersome.
The **signac** H5Store feature offers users a convenient wrapper around the ``h5py`` library for loading and saving both hierarchical/key-value data and numerical array data in the widely-used HDF5 format.
The ``job.data`` attribute is an instance of the ``H5Store`` class, and is a key-value store saved on disk as ``signac_data.h5`` in the job workspace.
Users who prefer to split data across multiple files can use the ``job.stores`` API to save in multiple HDF5 files.
Corresponding ``project.data`` and ``project.stores`` attributes exist, which save data files in the project root directory.
Using an instance of ``H5Store`` as a context manager allows users to keep the HDF5 file open while reading large chunks of the data:

.. code-block:: python

    job.stores[store_name][key_name] = np.random.rand(

>         3, 3, 3)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    store_name = "population"
    key_name = "Ney York"
    job.stores[store_name][key_name] = np.random.rand(
        3, 3, 3)
```

Author: This doesn't make sense. We're assigning a 3x3x3 array of random values to represent the population of New York. ❓

Reviewer 2: Fair enough, I was so focused on addressing one problem, that I didn't look to see it caused others... I will fix sorry about that.

Reviewer 2: I just removed my changes and the original line.

.. [#] https://github.com/glotzerlab/signac-examples

Research projects often address problems where questions change rapidly, data models are always in flux, and compute infrastructure varies widely from project to project.
The **signac** data management framework is a tool designed by researchers, for researchers, to simplify the process of prototyping and performing reproducible scientific computations.
It forgoes serializing complex data files into a database in favor of working with these files directly, providing fast indexing utilities for a set of directories.
Using **signac**, a data space on the file system can be initialized, searched, and modified using either a Python or command-line interface.
The companion package **signac-flow** interacts with the data space to generate and analyze data through reproducible workflows that scale from laptops to supercomputers.
Arbitrary shell commands can be run by **signac-flow** as part of a workflow, making it as flexible as a script in any language of choice.

With **signac**, file-based data and metadata are organized in folders and JSON files, respectively (see Figure :ref:`overview`).

> A **signac** data space, or "workspace," is composed of jobs, which are individual directories associated with a single primary key known as a "state point" stored in a file ``signac_statepoint.json`` in that directory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A **signac** data space, or "workspace", is composed of jobs, which are individual directories associated with a single primary key known as a "state point" stored in a file ``signac_statepoint.json`` in that directory.
```

Reviewer 3: I was reading more about this. It seems like a convention, so I'll resolve the conversation.

:author: Hardik Ojha
:email: hojha@ch.iitr.ac.in
:institution: Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee

:author: Carl S. Adorf
:email: TODO
:institution: Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

:author: Sharon C. Glotzer
:email: sglotzer@umich.edu
:institution: Department of Physics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
:institution: Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
:institution: Biointerfaces Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

:bibliography: paper

-------------------------------------------------------------------
signac: Data Management and Workflows for Computational Researchers
-------------------------------------------------------------------

.. class:: abstract

The signac data management framework (https://signac.io) helps researchers execute reproducible computational studies, scales workflows from laptops to supercomputers, and emphasizes portability and fast prototyping.
With signac, users can track, search, and archive data and metadata for file-based workflows and automate workflow submission on high performance computing (HPC) clusters.

> We will discuss recent improvements to the software's feature set, scalability, scientific applications, usability, and community.

Author: Is this better?
```suggestion
We will discuss recent growth in the software's feature set, scalability, scientific applications, usability, and community.
```

Reviewer 2: I prefer improvements as it implies that extent features may be improving as well. Growth suggests just addition to me.

Reviewer: if you say "improvements" it should be "community engagement" because "improvements to community" reads strangely

> Newly implemented synced data structures, features for generalized workflow execution, and performance optimizations will be covered, as well as recent research using the framework and the project's efforts on improving documentation, contributor onboarding, and governance.

Author: > "efforts on improving documentation, contributor onboarding, and governance."

Do we agree that this should be in the abstract? I'm a little unsure about its relative importance, and wondering whether we should close the abstract with something more interesting/meaningful.

Reviewer 2: I don't necessarily like the wording but something like this needs to be mentioned I think since it does take up a half page and isn't covered elsewhere. Maybe something like
```suggestion
Newly implemented synced data structures, features for generalized workflow execution, and performance optimizations will be covered, as well as recent research using the framework and changes to the project's outreach and governance as a response to its growth.
```

Reviewer 3: I agree with @b-butler here

.. class:: keywords

   data management, data science, database, simulation, collaboration, workflow, HPC, reproducibility

Introduction
------------

.. figure:: signac_overview.pdf
    :align: center
    :scale: 40 %
    :figclass: w

    Overview of the signac framework.
    Users first create a project, which initializes a workspace directory on disk.
    Users define state points which are dictionaries that uniquely identify a job.
    The workspace holds a directory for each job, containing JSON files that store the state point and job document.
    The job directory name is a hash of the state point's contents.
    Here, the ``init.py`` file initializes an empty project and adds one job with state point ``{"a": 1}``.
    Next, users define a workflow using a subclass of signac-flow's ``FlowProject``.
    The workflow shown has three operations (simulate, analyze, visualize) that, when executed, produce two new files ``results.txt`` and ``plot.png`` in the job directory. :label:`overview`

The full source code of all examples in this paper can be found online [#]_.

> .. [#] https://github.com/glotzerlab/signac-examples

Author: This statement isn't accurate at present, we don't actually have these examples online. However, we do need to add groups to `signac-examples`. It would be great if we made a real example that follows this paper's "simulate, analyze, visualize" sample workflow, and link to it somewhere in this paper.

Author: Discussed with @b-butler: the shortest simulation we can think of is a 2D random walk. State point parameters: sigma and a replica index. We can have operations for "simulate, analyze, visualize" and group them. We can also use `job.data` to store the walk and aggregate over all jobs to create a plot for all jobs with the same sigma.

Reviewer 2: I want to reword the above statement regardless. It seems misleading even with the example. I would prefer something like
``` rst
Working examples of features presented in this paper can be found online at [#]_.
```

Author: I'm going to commit that suggested text and we can adjust placement / etc. later.
```suggestion
Working examples of features presented in this paper can be found online at [#]_.

.. [#] https://github.com/glotzerlab/signac-examples
```

Research projects often address problems where questions change rapidly, data models are always in flux, and compute infrastructure varies widely from project to project.

> The signac data management framework is a tool designed by researchers, for researchers, to make prototyping quick and reproducibility easy.

Author: Suggesting:
```suggestion
The signac data management framework is a tool designed by researchers, for researchers, to simplify the process of prototyping and performing reproducible scientific computations.
```

It forgoes serializing complex data files into a database in favor of working with these files directly, providing fast indexing utilities for a set of directories.

> Using signac, a data space on the file system is easily initialized, searched, and modified using either a Python or command-line interface.

Author: Reduce use of "easy/easily."
```suggestion
Using signac, a data space on the file system can be initialized, searched, and modified using either a Python or command-line interface.
```

> The companion package signac-flow interacts with the data space to generate and analyze data through reproducible workflows that easily scale from laptops to supercomputers.

Author: Reduce use of "easy/easily."
```suggestion
The companion package signac-flow interacts with the data space to generate and analyze data through reproducible workflows that scale from laptops to supercomputers.
```

Arbitrary shell commands can be run by signac-flow as part of a workflow, making it as flexible as a script in any language of choice.

With signac, file-based data and metadata are organized in folders and JSON files, respectively (see Figure :ref:`overview`).

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

A signac data space, or "workspace," is composed of jobs, which are individual directories associated with a single primary key known as a "state point" stored in a file ``signac_statepoint.json`` in that directory.
These files allow signac to index the data space, providing a database-like interface to a collection of directories.
Arbitrary user data may be stored in user-created files in these jobs, although signac also provides convenient facilities for storing simple lightweight data or array-like data via JSON and HDF5 utilities.

> Readers seeking more detail on signac may refer to past signac papers: :cite:`signac_commat, signac_scipy_2018` as well as the signac website [#]_ and documentation [#]_.

Author: ```suggestion
Readers seeking more details about signac may refer to past signac papers: :cite:`signac_commat, signac_scipy_2018` as well as the signac website [#]_ and documentation [#]_.
```

.. [#] https://signac.io
.. [#] https://docs.signac.io

This filesystem-based approach has both advantages and disadvantages.
Its key advantages lie in flexibility and portability.

> The serverless design removes the need for any external running server process, making it easy to operate on any arbitrary filesystem.

Author: "arbitrary filesystem" doesn't mean anything to me.
```suggestion
The serverless design removes the need for any external running server process, making it easy to operate on any filesystem.
```

> The design is also intrinsically distributed, making it well suited for highly-parallel workflows where each instance generates more file-based data.

Author: Unclear what "instance" means. Is this better?
```suggestion
The design is also intrinsically distributed, making it well suited for highly parallel workflows where multiple processes concurrently read or write file-based data stored in job directories.
```

> Conversely, this distributed approach precludes performance advantages of centralized data stores with persistent indexes in memory.

Author: ```suggestion
Conversely, this distributed approach precludes the performance advantages of centralized data stores with persistent indexes in memory.
```

Typically, the signac approach works very well for projects up to 100,000 jobs, while significantly larger projects may have wait times that constrain interactive usage.

> These limits are inherent to signac's use of small files for each job's state point, but the framework has been aggressively optimized and uses extensive caching/buffering to maximize the throughput that can be achieved within this model.

Author: Is this better?
```suggestion
These limits are inherent to signac's use of small files for each job's state point, but the framework has been aggressively optimized and uses extensive caching/buffering to maximize the achievable throughput within this model.
```

> The framework is a strong choice for applications involving file-based workflows, especially those that are quickly evolving or will run on HPC clusters, especially where the amount of required computation per job is large.

Author: Avoid saying "especially" twice in a row. This could probably be turned into a bulleted list that mentions parameter studies (see other comment below).
```suggestion
The framework is a strong choice for applications involving file-based workflows, especially those that are quickly evolving or will run on HPC clusters, and ideally where the amount of required computation per job is large.
```

> The framework is a strong choice for applications involving file-based workflows, especially those that are quickly evolving or will run on HPC clusters, especially where the amount of required computation per job is large.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The framework is a strong choice for applications involving file-based workflows, especially those that are quickly evolving or will run on HPC clusters, and ideally where the amount of required computation per job is large.
```

For example, M. W. Thompson *et al.* in :cite:`thompson.etal2019a` used 396 jobs/state points to study the screening of room-temperature ionic liquids with GROMACS :cite:`pronk.etal2013,lindahl.etal2001,hess.etal2008,abraham.etal2015a` simulations.

..
    TODO: insert examples of real world projects with scientific applications [HOOMD, MPB, etc],
    project sizes [100,000 jobs], number of jobs / number of terabytes).

    Brandon - I think asking Allen about his binary sphere paper may be useful. Most papers don't

>     seem to mention in a simple way the approximate number of jobs they had.

Author: Rosy's new Nature Communications paper cites the number of jobs and mentions that they're stored in a hierarchy. Is that confusing to describe? Would it be okay to just specify the number of jobs without mentioning the hierarchy?

Separately, I am realizing that we've missed opportunities to mention two key concepts:
- parameter studies (as a broadly motivating purpose for signac, which applies to the vast majority of real-world use cases)
- homogeneous/heterogeneous schemas (state points don't have to look alike, and can change over time)

Author: Discussed with @b-butler. We're going to elaborate a little more on Matt Thompson's paper and the structure of the state points. In the Applications section, we're going to switch which paper we cite from Rosy and use the newer Nature Communications paper (more jobs, probably more impressive overall).

Author: Done.

Users working with large tabular data (e.g. flat files on disk or data from a SQL database) may prefer to use libraries like pandas, dask, or RAPIDS that are specifically designed for those use cases.
However, it is possible to create a signac project with state points corresponding to each row, which may be a good use of signac if there is file-based data affiliated with each row's parameters.

This paper will focus on developments to the signac framework over the last 3 years, during which features, flexibility, usability, and performance have been greatly improved.
The core data structures in signac have been overhauled to provide a powerful and generic implementation of "synced collections," that we will leverage in future versions of signac to enable more performant data indexing and flexible data layouts.

> In signac-flow, we have added support for submitting groups of operations with conditional dependencies, allowing for more efficient utilization of large HPC resources.

Author: Do we care that the sections for synced collections and workflows are given in the opposite order of the abstract and this paragraph? Which order should we prefer?

Reviewer 2: I personally don't care.

Author: Resolving. I think the text reads just fine.

Further developments allow for operations to act on arbitrary subsets of the data space, or "aggregates," rather than single jobs alone.
Moving beyond code development, this paper will also discuss the scientific work these features have enabled and the organizational developments from key partnerships and affiliations with scientific software initiatives and organizations such as MoSDeF and NumFOCUS.

> We will share our project's experience in progressively revising project governance to catalyze sustained contributions of many kinds, while adding more points of entry for learning about the project (Slack support, office hours), and participating in Google Summer of Code in 2020 as a NumFOCUS Affiliated Project.

Author: ```suggestion
We will share our project's experience in progressively revising project governance to catalyze sustained contributions of many kinds, while adding more points of entry for learning about the project (Slack support, weekly public office hours), and participating in Google Summer of Code in 2020 as a NumFOCUS Affiliated Project.
```

Applications of signac
----------------------

The signac framework has been cited 51 times, according to Google Scholar, and has been used in a range of scientific fields with various types of computational workflows.

> Some of these studies include quantum calculations of small molecules :cite:`govoni.etal2018`, screenings of ionic liquids and organic solvents :cite:`thompson.etal2019a`, inverse design of pair potentials :cite:`adorf.etal2018`, optimizing photonic band gaps in colloidal materials :cite:`cersonsky.etal2018`, benchmarking atom-density representations for use in machine learning :cite:`musil.etal2021`, fluid flow in polymer solutions :cite:`howard.etal2019`, design of optical metamaterials :cite:`harper.etal2020`, and economic analysis of drought risk in coastal regions :cite:`rodziewicz.etal2020`.

Author: ```suggestion
Some of these studies include quantum calculations of small molecules :cite:`govoni.etal2018`, screenings of ionic liquids and organic solvents :cite:`thompson.etal2019a`, inverse design of pair potentials :cite:`adorf.etal2018`, optimizing photonic band gaps in colloidal materials :cite:`cersonsky.etal2018`, benchmarking atom-density representations for use in machine learning :cite:`musil.etal2021`, simulating fluid flow in polymer solutions :cite:`howard.etal2019`, design of optical metamaterials :cite:`harper.etal2020`, and economic analysis of drought risk in agriculture :cite:`rodziewicz.etal2020`.
```

However, there are many other fields with similar hardware needs where signac can be applied.
These include simulation-heavy HPC workloads such as fluid dynamics, atomic/nuclear physics, or genomics, data-intensive fields such as economics or machine learning, and applications needing fast, flexible prototypes for optimization and data analysis.

..
    TODO: Categorize papers by field, show counts? e.g. The most common scientific fields citing signac are materials science (10), molecular simulation (8), optical materials (5), ...

    Brandon - this is cool, but may be more work than is worth it.

While there is no "typical" signac project, factors such as computational complexity and data sizes offer some rough guidelines for when signac's database-on-the-filesystem is appropriate.
For instance, the time to check the status of a workflow depends on the number of jobs, number of operations, and number of conditions to evaluate for those jobs.
To give a rough idea of the limits of scalability, it can be difficult to scale signac projects beyond around 100,000 jobs while keeping tasks like checking workflow status in an "interactive" time scale of 1-2 minutes.

> Many signac projects have 100 to 10,000 jobs, with each job workspace containing arbitrarily large data sizes (the file size of the job workspace has little effect on the speed of the signac framework).

Author: ```suggestion
Many signac projects have 100 to 10,000 jobs, with each job workspace containing arbitrarily large data sizes (the total file size of the job workspace has little effect on the speed of the signac framework).
```

Some users that primarily wish to leverage signac-flow's workflows for execution and submission may have a very small number of jobs (< 10).

> One example of this would be executing a small number of expensive biomolecular simulations using different random seeds in each job's state point.

Author: I added a couple sentences about why even "small" projects benefit from signac.
```suggestion
One example of this would be executing a small number of expensive biomolecular simulations using different random seeds in each job's state point.
Importantly, projects with a small number of jobs can be expanded at a later time, and make use of the same workflow defined for the initial set of jobs.
The abilities to grow a project and change its schema on-the-fly catalyze the kind of exploration that is crucial to answering research questions.
```

..
    TODO Try to find example of a project with small number of state points in literature citing signac.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> The workflow submission features of signac-flow interoperates with popular HPC schedulers including SLURM, PBS/TORQUE, and LSF automating the generation and submission of scheduler job scripts.

Author: I usually see these called "batch scripts" as well as "job scripts", and changing this word helps avoid overloading the term "job."
```suggestion
The workflow submission features of signac-flow interoperates with popular HPC schedulers including SLURM, PBS/TORQUE, and LSF automating the generation and submission of scheduler batch scripts.
```

> Directives set through decorators manage resource and execution requests for operations; examples of directives include number of nodes or GPUs, the walltime, and memory.

Author: ```suggestion
Directives are set through Python function decorators and define resource and execution requests for operations.
Examples of directives include number of CPUs or GPUs, the walltime, and memory.
```

> Use directives as an abstraction signac-flow can generate scripts for the whatever scheduler is currently present, enabling portability across HPC systems.

Author: This sentence didn't make much sense 🙃 
```suggestion
The use of directives allows signac-flow workflows to be portable across HPC systems by generating resource requests that are specific to each machine's scheduler.
```

Moreover, signac-flow can submit multiple operations and/or the same operation with multiple jobs in
a single submission script either in parallel or serial.

> This allows users to leverage scheduler resources effectively and minimize queue time (or optimize for HPC policies that prefer large submissions) by many operations into a small number of scheduler submissions.

Author: I'm not sure if this belongs here -- it's vaguely describing bundling without mentioning it by name. I'd rather see this moved to the section on bundling, which is currently very short.

Some signac developers have begun conversations with experimental researchers regarding how the signac framework might be useful for a broader range of research tasks.

> Workflows that combine computational steps, such as optimization or post processing, with steps that might be performed (or manually triggered) by a researcher, such as the collection of data files from a microscope or robot, have complexities could benefit from the infrastructure signac's framework offers.

Author: ```suggestion
Workflows that combine computational steps, such as optimization or post processing, with steps that might be performed (or manually triggered) by a researcher, such as the collection of data files from a microscope or robot, have complexities that could benefit from the infrastructure signac's framework offers.
```

> Workflows that combine computational steps, such as optimization or post processing, with steps that might be performed (or manually triggered) by a researcher, such as the collection of data files from a microscope or robot, have complexities could benefit from the infrastructure signac's framework offers.

Author: I have mixed feelings on whether this hypothetical use case of "signac with experimental data" is interesting/useful to this paper's expected audience. What do you think?

Reviewer 2: I would probably remove it unless you want to keep it.

Overview of New Features
------------------------

> The last three years of development on the signac framework have improved its usability, feature set, user and developer documentation, and potential applications.

Author: ```suggestion
The last three years of development of the signac framework have expanded its usability, feature set, user and developer documentation, and potential applications.
```

> Some of the largest architectural changes in the framework will be discussed in their own sections, namely extensions of the workflow model (support for executing operation groups and aggregators that allow operations to act on multiple jobs) and a much more performant and flexible re-implementation of the core "data structure" classes that synchronize signac's Python representation of state points and job documents with JSON-encoded dictionaries on disk.

Author: ```suggestion
Some of the largest architectural changes in the framework will be discussed in their own sections, namely extensions of the workflow model (support for executing groups of operations and aggregators that allow operations to act on multiple jobs) and a much more performant and flexible re-implementation of the core "data structure" classes that synchronize signac's Python representation of state points and job documents with JSON-encoded dictionaries on disk.
```

Data Archival
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The primary purpose of the core signac package is to simplify and accelerate data management.
The signac command line interface is a common entry point for users, and provides subcommands for searching, reading, and modifying the data space.
New commands for import and export simplify the process of archiving signac projects into a structure that is both human-readable and machine-readable for future access (with or without signac).
Archival is an integral part of research data operations that is frequently overlooked.
By using highly compatible and long-lived formats such as JSON for core data storage with simple name schemes, signac aims to preserve projects and make it easier for studies to be independently reproduced.

> This is aligned with the principles of TRUE (Transparent, Reproducible, Usable by others, and Extensible) simulations put forth by the MoSDeF collaboration (https://doi.org/10.1080/00268976.2020.1742938).

Author: TODO: fix citation.

..
    TODO: mention MIDAS Reproducibility Challenge? signac won an award.
    https://signac.io/talks/2020/08/05/midas-reproducibility.html

    Brandon - I don't know if it fits in this section, except maybe as proof of our claims. I think
    we are fine without mentioning it though especially since it is an internal to UM organization.

Simplifying and streamlining existing functionalities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Data access via the shell: The ``signac shell`` command allows the user to quickly enter a Python interpreter that is pre-populated with variables for the current project or job (when in a project or job directory).

Author: Make all of these subheadings bold.

This means that manipulating a job document or reading data can be done through a hybrid of bash/shell commands and Python commands that are fast to type.

.. code-block:: shell

    ~/project $ ls
    signac.rc workspace
    ~/project $ cd workspace/42b7b4f2921788e.../
    ~/project/workspace/42b7b4f2921788e... $ signac shell
    Python 3.8.3
    signac 1.6.0

    Project:        test
    Job:            42b7b4f2921788ea14dac5566e6f06d0
    Root:           ~/project
    Workspace:      ~/project/workspace
    Size:           1

    Interact with the project interface using the
    "project" or "pr" variable. Type "help(project)"
    or "help(signac)" for more information.

    >>> job.sp
    {'a': 1}

Alternative short snippet using -c command flag:

.. code-block:: shell

    ~/project/workspace/42b7b4f... $ signac shell -c \
    "print(job.sp)"
    {'a': 1}

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> HDF5 support for storing numerical data: Many applications used in research generate or consume large numerical arrays. For applications in Python, NumPy arrays are a de facto standard for in-memory representation and manipulation. However, saving these arrays to disk and handling data structures that mix dictionaries and numerical arrays can be cumbersome. The signac H5Store feature offers users a convenient wrapper around the h5py library for loading and saving both hierarchical/key-value data and numerical array data in the widely-used HDF5 format. The ``job.data`` attribute is an instance of the ``H5Store`` class, and is a key-value store saved on disk as ``signac_data.h5`` in the job workspace. Users who prefer to split data across multiple files can use the ``job.stores`` API to save in multiple HDF5 files. Corresponding ``project.data`` and ``project.stores`` attributes exist, which save data files in the project root directory. Using an instance of ``H5Store`` as a context manager allows users to keep the HDF5 file open while reading large chunks of the data.

Author: Add citations for h5py and HDF5.
```suggestion
HDF5 support for storing numerical data: Many applications used in research generate or consume large numerical arrays.
For applications in Python, NumPy arrays are a de facto standard for in-memory representation and manipulation.
However, saving these arrays to disk and handling data structures that mix dictionaries and numerical arrays can be cumbersome.
The signac H5Store feature offers users a convenient wrapper around the ``h5py`` library for loading and saving both hierarchical/key-value data and numerical array data in the widely-used HDF5 format.
The ``job.data`` attribute is an instance of the ``H5Store`` class, and is a key-value store saved on disk as ``signac_data.h5`` in the job workspace.
Users who prefer to split data across multiple files can use the ``job.stores`` API to save in multiple HDF5 files.
Corresponding ``project.data`` and ``project.stores`` attributes exist, which save data files in the project root directory.
Using an instance of ``H5Store`` as a context manager allows users to keep the HDF5 file open while reading large chunks of the data:
```

.. code-block:: python

    job.stores[store_name][key_name] = np.random.rand(
        3, 3, 3)
    with job.data:
        # Copy array data from the file to memory
        # (which will persist after the HDF5 file
        # is closed) by slicing with an empty tuple:

>         my_array = job.data["my_array"][()]

Author: Is it bad to use `store_name` and `key_name` without defining them?

Should we delete the first two lines and just show the context manager?

Reviewer 2: I just expanded the snippet

Integrating with the PyData Ecosystem: Users can now summarize data from a signac project into a pandas DataFrame for analysis.
The ``project.to_dataframe()`` feature exports state point and job document information to a pandas DataFrame in a consistent way that allows for quick analysis of all jobs' data.

..
    TODO: Make note about heterogeneous schemas, interesting use cases?

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

Support for Jupyter notebooks has also been added, enabling rich HTML representations of signac objects.

Advanced searching and filtering of the workspace: The ``signac diff`` command, available on both the command line and Python interfaces, returns the difference between two or more state points and allows for easily assessing subsets of the dataspace. By unifying sp and doc querying, filtering, and searching workspaces can be more fine-grained and intuitive.

Performance Enhancements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> In early 2021, a significant portion of the codebase was profiled and refactored to improve performance and these improvements were released in signac v1.6.0 and signac-flow v0.12.0.

Author: We usually drop the "v" in signac versions, I think.
```suggestion
In early 2021, a significant portion of the codebase was profiled and refactored to improve performance and these improvements were released in signac 1.6.0 and signac-flow 0.12.0.
```

> As a result of these changes, large signac projects saw 4-7x for operations such as iterating over the jobs in a project compared to the v1.5.0 release of signac.

Author: ```suggestion
As a result of these changes, large signac projects saw 4-7x speedups for operations such as iterating over the jobs in a project compared to the 1.5.0 release of signac.
```

> Similarly, performance of a sample workflow that checks status, runs, and submits a FlowProject with 1,000 jobs, 3 operations, and 2 label functions improved roughly 4x compared to the v0.11.0 release of signac-flow.

Author: ```suggestion
Similarly, performance of a sample workflow that checks status, runs, and submits a FlowProject with 1,000 jobs, 3 operations, and 2 label functions improved roughly 4x compared to signac-flow 0.11.0.
```

These improvements allow signac to scale to ~100,000 jobs.

> In signac, the core of the signac Project and Job classes were refactored to support lazy attribute access and delayed initialization, which greatly reduces the total amount of disk I/O by waiting until data is actually requested by the user.

Author: ```suggestion
In signac, the core of the ``Project`` and ``Job`` classes were refactored to support lazy attribute access and delayed initialization, which greatly reduces the total amount of disk I/O by waiting until data is actually requested by the user.
```

> Other improvements include early exits in functions, reducing the number of required system calls with smarter usage of the ``os`` library, and switching to algorithms that operate in constant time ($O(1)$) instead of linear time ($O(N_{jobs})$).

Author: ```suggestion
Other improvements include early exits in functions, reducing the number of required system calls with smarter usage of the ``os`` library, and switching to algorithms that operate in constant time (:math:`O(1)`) instead of linear time (:math:`O(N_{jobs})`).
```

> Optimizations were identified by profiling the performance of common operations on small and large real-world projects with cProfile and visualized with snakeviz.

Author: Cite snakeviz?

Reviewer 2: Yes, I will work on getting that done.

..
    TODO: include a graph of performance from 1.0 to now

Similarly, performance enhancements were also made in the signac-flow package.
Some of the optimizations identified include lazy evaluation of run commands and directives, and caching of job status information.

> In addition, the improvements in signac such as faster iteration over large signac projects used in signac-flow made signac-flow's primary functions -- checking project status, executing operations, and submitting operations to a cluster -- significantly faster.

Author: Figure out how to use fancy em dashes. Try Unicode character —?
```suggestion
In addition, the improvements in signac such as faster iteration over large signac projects used in signac-flow made signac-flow's primary functions — checking project status, executing operations, and submitting operations to a cluster — significantly faster.
```

Improved User Output
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Workflow graph detection: The preconditions and postconditions of operations in a signac-flow ``FlowProject`` implicitly define a graph. For example, if the operation "analyze" depends on the operation "simulate" via the precondition ``@FlowProject.pre.after(simulate)``, then there is a directed edge from "simulate" to "analyze."
This graph can now be detected from the workflow conditions and returned in a NetworkX compatible format for display or inspection.

> Templated status output: Querying the status of a signac-flow project now has many more options and has been templated to allow for raw, Markdown, or HTML output. In doing so, the output has also become cleaner and compatible with external tools.

Author: ```suggestion
Templated status output: Querying the status of a signac-flow project now has many options controlling the information displayed and has been templated to allow for raw, Markdown, or HTML output. In doing so, the output has also become cleaner and compatible with external tools.
```

Enhanced Workflows
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Directives: Directives provide a way to specify required resources on HPC schedulers such as number of CPUs/GPUs, MPI ranks, OpenMP threads, walltime, memory, and others. Directives can be a function of the job as well as the operation, allowing for great flexibility. In addition, directives work seamlessly with operation groups, job aggregation, and submission bundling (all of which are described in a later section).

Dynamic Workspaces: The signac-flow package can now handle workspaces where jobs are created as the result of operations on other jobs. This is crucial for optimization workflows and iteratively sampling parameter spaces, and allows projects to become more automated with some data points only run if a prior condition on another data point is reached.

Executing complex workflows via groups and aggregation
------------------------------------------------------

> Although already capable of implementing reproducible quality workflows, signac-flow has enhanced the usability through two new concepts: groups and aggregation.

Author: ```suggestion
Two new concepts in signac-flow provide users with significantly more power to implement complex workflows: groups and aggregation.
```

As both names imply, the features enable the "grouping" or "aggregating" of existing concepts: operations in the case of groups and jobs in the case of aggregates.

> In the conceptual model of signac-flow, flow builds on signac's notions of the project and job (the unit of the data space) through a FlowProject class that adds the ability to execute operations (the unit of a workflow) to a signac Project.

Author: ```suggestion
The conceptual model of signac-flow builds on signac's notions of the ``Project`` and ``Job`` (the unit of the data space) through a ``FlowProject`` class that adds the ability to define and execute operations (the unit of a workflow) that act on jobs.
```

> Operations are functions (Python functions or shell commands) that act on a job within the data space, and are created using Python decorator syntax .

Author: ```suggestion
Operations are Python functions or shell commands that act on a job within the data space, and are defined using Python decorator syntax:
```

..
    Hardik - thinks that for this portion, the snippets should be consistent so that readers can
    easily run these,

    Brandon - I think that the snippets are best self contained. Without significant boilerplate
    anyways these will not run since there is no underlying signac project.

.. code-block:: python

    # project.py
    from flow import FlowProject

    @FlowProject.operation
    @Flowproject.post.true("city")
    def store_current_city(job):

>         job.doc.city == "Ann Arbor"

Author: I'd like to make an example that feels more realistic than assigning the same value to every job (I assume that was the intent, at least -- it's currently a double-equals and not an assignment).

>     if __name__ == '__main__':

Author: ```suggestion
    if __name__ == "__main__":
```

        FlowProject().main()

> When this project is run using signac-flow's command line API (``python project.py run``), the user's current city is written into the job document Ann Arbor in this case.

Author: ```suggestion
When this project is run using signac-flow's command line API (``python project.py run``), the user's current city is written into the job document of every job in the project.
```

> Operations can have preconditions and postconditions that define their eligibility, e.g. the existence of an input file in a job's workspace or a key in the job document (as shown in the above snippet) can be a precondition that must be met before an operation can be executed, or a postcondition that indicates an operation is complete.

Author: ```suggestion
Operations can have preconditions and postconditions that define their eligibility.
All preconditions must be met in order for a operation to be eligible for a given job.
If any postcondition is met, that indicates an operation is complete (and thus ineligible).
Examples of such conditions include the existence of an input file in a job's workspace or a key in the job document (as shown in the above snippet).
```

However, this type of conditional workflow can be inefficient when sequential workflows are coupled with an HPC scheduler interface, because the user must log on to the HPC and submit the next operation after the previous operation is complete.

> This encourages large operations which are not modular and do not accurately represent the individual units of the work-flow limiting signac-flow's utility.

Author: ```suggestion
The desire to submit large and long-running jobs to HPC schedulers encourages users to write large operation functions which are not modular and do not accurately represent the individual units of the workflow, thereby limiting signac-flow's utility and reducing the readability of the workflow.
```

> The concept of a group, implemented by the ``FlowGroup`` class and ``FlowProject.make_group`` method, allows users to combine multiple operations into a group.

Author: ```suggestion
Groups, implemented by the ``FlowGroup`` class and ``FlowProject.make_group`` method, allows users to combine multiple operations into a single entity that can be run or submitted.
```

> Submitting a group allows signac-flow to dynamically resolve preconditions and postconditions of operations as each operation is executed, making it possible to combine separate operations (e.g. for simulation and analysis and plotting) into a single submission script with the expectation that all will execute despite later operations depending on the former.

Author: ```suggestion
Submitting a group allows signac-flow to dynamically resolve preconditions and postconditions of operations as each operation is executed, making it possible to combine separate operations (e.g. for simulation and analysis and plotting) into a single submission script with the expectation that all will execute despite the dependencies between operations.
```

Furthermore, groups are aware of directives and can properly combine the directives of their constituent operations to specify resources and quantities like walltime whether executing in parallel or serial.

.. code-block:: python

    from flow import FlowProject

    new_group = FlowProject.make_group(

>         name="new_group")

Author: This might fit on one line. Need to check.

    @new_group.with_directives(

>         {"ngpu": 2.0,

Author: GPUs must be an integer.
```suggestion
        {"ngpu": 2,
```

>          "walltime": lambda j: j.sp.size * 4})

Author: It's not clear that `j` is a job. It's also unclear where the factor of 4 comes from. I'd rather do something like:
```suggestion
         "walltime": lambda job: job.doc.hours_to_run})
```

    @FlowProject.post.true("foo")
    @FlowProject.operation

>     def foo(job):

Author: I don't think that examples with foo / bar are clear to read or understand. In particular, users might wonder why the operation and document key have the same name.

        job.doc.foo = True

    @new_group

>     @FlowProject.pre.true("foo")

Author: `after` is a powerful precondition and should be shown here. It's mentioned above in the section about graph detection.
```suggestion
    @FlowProject.pre.after(foo)
```

    @FlowProject.post.true("bar")
    @FlowProject.operation
    def bar(job):
        job.doc.bar = True

Groups also allow for specifying multiple machine specific resources (CPU or GPU) with the same operation.
An operation can have unique directives for each distinct group to which it belongs.
By associating an operation's directives with respect to a specific group, groups can represent distinct compute environments, such as a local workstation or a remote supercomputing cluster.

.. code-block:: python

    from flow import FlowProject

    cpu_env = FlowProject.make_group(name="cpu")
    gpu_env = FlowProject.make_group(name="gpu")

    @cpu_env.with_directives({"np": 48})
    @gpu_env.with_directives({"ngpu": 4})
    # For the operation when not run through the cpu

>     # or gpu group

Author: I don't like breaking up the decorators with comments. Should this comment be deleted in favor of an in-text explanation?

    @FlowProject.operation.with_directives({"np": 4})
    def expensive_operation(job):
        # expensive computation for either
        # CPU or GPU here
        pass

> Users also frequently work or want to work with multiple jobs within a singular repetitive task such as plotting.

Author: ```suggestion
Users also frequently work with multiple jobs when performing tasks such as plotting data from all jobs in the same figure.
```

Though the signac package has methods like ``Project.groupby``, which can generate subsets of the project that are grouped by a state point key, there has been no similar feature in signac-flow to allow operations to act on multiple jobs.

> The concept of _aggregation_ provides a straightforward way for users to write and submit operations that act on arbitrary subsets of jobs in a signac data space.

Author: We need to be consistent about using italics/etc. to introduce key terms.
```suggestion
The concept of aggregation provides a straightforward way for users to write and submit operations that act on arbitrary subsets of jobs in a signac data space.
```

Just as the groups feature acts as an abstraction over operations, aggregation can be viewed as an abstraction over jobs.

> Operations now can accept multiple job instances as positional arguments though Python's argument unpacking while maintaining backwards compatibility.

Author: Probably not important to mention backwards compatibility here. I fixed a typo and rephrased it.
```suggestion
When decorated with an aggregator, operations can accept multiple job instances as positional arguments through Python's argument unpacking.
```

> Decorators are used to define aggregation behavior, encompassed in the ``aggregator`` decorator for single operations and in the argument ``aggregator_function`` to ``FlowProject.make_group`` for groups of operations.

Author: ```suggestion
Decorators are used to define aggregation behavior, encompassed in the ``@aggregator`` decorator for single operations and in the argument ``aggregator_function`` to ``FlowProject.make_group`` for groups of operations.
```

.. code-block:: python

    from flow import FlowProject

    @aggregator
    @FlowProject.operation
    def operation_on_all_jobs(*jobs):
        import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
        import numpy as np

        x = np.array(
            [job.sp.temperature for job in jobs])
        y = np.array(
            [job.doc.activity for job in jobs])
        fig, ax = plt.subplots()
        ax.plot(x, y)
        ax.set_title(
            "Enzymatic Activity Across Temperature")

>         fig.savefig("enzyme-activity.png")

Author: No need for NumPy, and use a scatter plot instead.
```suggestion

        x = [job.sp.temperature for job in jobs]
        y = [job.doc.activity for job in jobs]
        fig, ax = plt.subplots()
        ax.scatter(x, y)
        ax.set_title(
            "Enzymatic Activity Across Temperature")
        fig.savefig("enzyme-activity.png")
```

Like groups, there are many reasons why a user might wish to use aggregation.

> For example, a signac data space that describes weather data for multiple cities in multiple years might want to plot or analyze data that uses ``aggregator.groupby("city")`` to show changes over time for each city in the data space.

Author: ```suggestion
For example, a signac data space that describes weather data for multiple cities in multiple years might want to plot or analyze data that uses ``@aggregator.groupby("city")`` to show changes over time for each city in the data space.
```

> Similarly, aggregating over replicas facilitates computing averaged quantities and errors.

Author: ```suggestion
Similarly, aggregating over replicas (e.g. the same simulation with different random seeds) facilitates computing averaged quantities and error bars.
```

Another example is submitting aggregates with a fixed number of jobs in each aggregate to enable massive parallelization by breaking a large MPI communicator into a smaller communicator for each independent job, which is necessary for efficient utilization of leadership-class supercomputers like OLCF Summit.

> A third concept while not new warrants attention in this section, bundling.
> Bundling is a third way to combine pieces of signac-flow's workflow.

Author: ```suggestion
Finally, bundling is another way to use workflows in conjunction with an HPC scheduling system.
```

Whereas aggregates are concerned with jobs and groups operations, bundling is concerned with combining what are effectively units of execution into a single submission script.
The simplest case of a bundle is a submission script with the same operation being executed for multiple jobs either in parallel or serial.

> Bundling is what allows the script to contain multiple jobs executing the same operation.

Author: ```suggestion
Bundling is what allows the submission script to contain multiple jobs executing the same operation.
```

By storing information on individual bundles, signac-flow prevents accidental resubmission just as in the unbundled case.

> While the example above does not use either groups or aggregation, bundles works seamlessly with both.

Author: We probably need to mention that unlike groups and aggregation, bundling is not a part of the workflow definition -- it's a choice made by the user at submission time.

Reviewer 2: See the changes above and at 298-300 (beginning of the section) to see if you think this resolves this.

> .. figure:: signac-flow_aggregation-groups-bundling.pdf

Author: Move this up higher, to the beginning of the section on workflows.

    :align: center
    :scale: 90 %
    :figclass: w

    Aggregation, groups, and bundling allow users to build complex workflows.
    The features are orthogonal, and can be used in any combination.
    Aggregation enables one operation or group to act on multiple jobs.
    Groups allow users to combine multiple operations into one, with dependencies among operations resolved at run time.
    Bundling helps users efficiently leverage HPC schedulers by submitting multiple commands in the same script, to be executed in serial or parallel.

Synced Collections: Backend-agnostic, persistent, mutable data structures
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Motivation
~~~~~~~~~~

All of signac's principal functions are designed around efficiently indexing a collection of directories.
By organizing job directories by the hash of their state point, signac can perform many operations in constant time.

> To present a Pythonic API, state points are exposed via a dictionary-like interface, making it very easy to modify a state point and have that change transparently reflected in both the JSON file and the name of the corresponding directory.

Author: ```suggestion
To present a Pythonic API, state points are exposed via a dictionary-like interface, making it very easy to modify a state point and have that change transparently reflected in both the JSON file and the name of the corresponding directory (which is the state point's hash).
```

The need to parse these JSON files for indexing and the complexity of modifying them represent the most significant barriers to scaling signac.

> Even in the absence of file modification, reading a large number of files simply to produce a database index becomes prohibitively expensive for large data spaces.

Author: ```suggestion
Even in the absence of file modification, simply reading a large number of files to produce a database index becomes prohibitively expensive for large data spaces.
```

Although various optimizations have incrementally improved signac's scalability, an alternative means of storing the state point and associated metadata that circumvents the heavy I/O costs of our current approach has the potential to make a much larger impact.

> However, replacing individual JSON files as the primary data source for signac without breaking signac's API would require a generic means for providing the same interface to the underlying index and metadata files irrespective of the underlying storage mechanism.

Reviewer 2: We need a replacement for files since we are talking about abstracting out the actual storage mechanism.  I tried "data", but given that metadata is the prior word, it seemed off.

Author: This can just say "metadata." It is a noun of its own, not just an adjectival noun / noun modifier.
```suggestion
However, replacing individual JSON files as the primary data source for signac without breaking signac's API would require a generic means for providing the same interface to the underlying index and metadata irrespective of the underlying storage mechanism.
```

Once developed, however, such an API would abstract out enough of the internals of signac to enable other generalizations as well, such as making it relatively easy to support alternate (and nearly arbitrary) data space layouts.

> The synced collections subpackage of signac represents the culmination of our efforts to expose this functionality, providing a generic framework within which interfaces corresponding to any of Python's built-in types can be easily constructed with arbitrary underlying synchronization protocols.

Author: Is it too strong to say _any_ of Python's built-in types? Should it be:
```suggestion
The synced collections subpackage of signac represents the culmination of our efforts to expose this functionality, providing a generic framework within which interfaces corresponding to Python's ``list`` and ``dict`` data structures can be easily constructed with arbitrary underlying synchronization protocols.
```

Reviewer 2: `set` needs to be added as well.

Author: We don't have any synced collections supporting `set` to my knowledge.

Reviewer 4: We cannot currently build sets, no. I intended the language to indicate more what would be possible than what has already been built, otherwise arbitrary underlying synchronization protocols also doesn't make sense. This section is talking more about what the framework aspires to be, and what is possible within the structure. The details of what is currently implemented are IMO not terribly important since adding new stuff is actually quite easy now that the framework is set up.

Author: This has been edited and is outdated. Resolving.

Summary of Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We designed synced collections to be flexible, easily extensible, and independent of the rest of signac.
The central element is the ``SyncedCollection`` class, which defines a new abstract class extending the ``collections.abc.Collection`` from the Python standard library.
A ``SyncedCollection`` is a ``Collection`` that adds two additional groups of abstract methods that must be implemented by its subclasses.
One group includes methods for synchronizing with an underlying resource, while the other contains methods for synchronizing with a standard collection of the underlying base type.
For instance, a ``JSONDict`` would implement the first set of methods to define how to save a dictionary to a JSON file and reload it, while it would implement the second set of methods to define how to convert between a ``JSONDict`` instance and a standard Python dictionary.

> Critically, these two sets of functions are orthogonal.

Author: There's an extra newline before this paragraph begins in the PDF. I'm not sure why, might be related to the figure above it?

Author: Seems fixed now.

> Therefore, it should be possible to implement different backend types and different data structures independently, then combine them into concrete classes using multiple inheritance.

Author: ```suggestion
Therefore, it is possible to implement different backend types and different data structures independently, then combine them into concrete classes using multiple inheritance.
```

> This solution is analogous to the way that language server protocols separate support for programming languages from support for editors, turning a :math:`M \times N` problem into a simple :math:`M+N` problem.

Author: ```suggestion
This solution is analogous to the way that language server protocols separate support for programming languages from support for editors, turning an :math:`M \times N` problem into a simpler :math:`M+N` problem.
```

Performance improvements in the form of Redis-based storage are already possible with synced collections, and as expected they show substantial speedups over the current JSON-based approach.
The use of the new buffering protocol has enabled us to prototype new buffering approaches that further improve performance in buffered mode.
At a larger scale, synced collections are a critical first step to enabling different data layouts on disk, such as the use of a single tabular index (e.g.
a SQLite database) for much faster work on homogeneous data spaces or the use of more deeply nested directory structures where a deeper hierarchy on disk offers organizational benefits.

The generality of synced collections makes them broadly useful even outside the signac framework.
The framework makes it easy for developers to create Pythonic APIs for data structures that might otherwise require significant additional implementation overhead.
Crucially, synced collections support nesting as a core feature, something that could be quite difficult to handle for developers of custom collection types.

> Moreover, while the framework was originally conceived to support synchronization of an in-memory data structure with a resource on disk, it can just as easily be used to synchronize with another in-memory resource.

Author: Reduce "easily."
```suggestion
Moreover, while the framework was originally conceived to support synchronization of an in-memory data structure with a resource on disk, it can also be used to synchronize with another in-memory resource.
```

> One powerful example of this would be the use of a synced collection to provide a Pythonic API to a collection-like data structure implemented as a C or C++ extension module that could function like a Python dictionary with suitable plumbing but lacks the standard APIs expected of such a class.

Author: > lacks the standard APIs expected of such a class.

@vyasr I'm confused, are you talking about the interface for MutableMapping? If so, should we say that? If not, what do you mean?

Reviewer 4: Yes, that is what I meant. I'm not sure that everyone will know what `MutableMapping` looks like though. `dict` is really the archetype of a `MutableMapping`, so if you want to make this sentence clearer and more explicit I would prefer to talk about the APIs expected of a "dict-like object".

Reviewer 5: I am also confused by this sentence. If it functions like a Python dictionary, what standard API is it missing?

Reviewer 6: Could we break this sentence up into 2-3 sentences?

With the synced collections framework, creating a new class providing such an API is reduced to simply requiring the implementation of two straightforward methods defining the synchronization protocol.

..
    TODO: discuss independence from the rest of signac, possibility of releasing as a separate package?

> Related Software
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
> 
> Are there other packages with related purposes? Vyas is not aware of any, the closest thing is Zict, a project Bradley pointed out a while ago.
> However, its scope is limited to composing mutable mappings.
> However, one natural question I'd expect from people is how this package to add a collection-like interface to some object compares to those objects directly implementing the interface.
> For example, I'd expect our closest comparison for a Redis-backed dict to be pyredis itself, which offers a dictionary-like API.
> I'd expect us to pretty much always be slower, but also to be much easier to work with and to support a lot more out-of-the-box (e.g.
> nested objects, buffering, and composition of data structures that may require more internal plumbing otherwise).
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

Project Evolution
-----------------

> The signac project has evolved from being an open-source project mostly developed and managed by the Glotzer Group at the University of Michigan, to being supported by over 30 contributors and committers/maintainers on 3 continents and with over 55 citations from academic and government research labs and 12 talks at large scientific, Python, and data science conferences.

Author: ```suggestion
The signac project has evolved from being an open-source project mostly developed and managed by the Glotzer Group at the University of Michigan, to being supported by over 30 contributors and 8 committers/maintainers on 3 continents and with over 55 citations from academic and government research labs and 12 talks at large scientific, Python, and data science conferences.
```

The growth in involvement with signac is the result of our focus on developing features based on user needs, as well as our efforts to transition signac users to signac contributors, through many initiatives in the past few years.
Through encouraging users to become contributors, we ensure that signac addresses real users' needs.

> We have expanded signac's contributor involvement to outside of the University of Michigan through expanded use in diverse research groups (and through maintainers graduating and staying involved?), but more notably through the Google Summer of Code (GSoC) program.

Author: ```suggestion
We have expanded signac's contributor base beyond the University of Michigan through research collaborations with other universities, sharing the framework at conferences, and through the Google Summer of Code (GSoC) program.
```

> Our experience from the GSoC led to a new committer (explained later in this section) and much work on some of the developments presented above, namely synced collections and aggregation.

Author: This is not explained later in the section 🙃 
```suggestion
Working with and mentoring students through GSoC led to a new committer and significant work on the synced collections and aggregation projects presented above.
```

To encourage code contributions from existing users, we maintain active support and discussion through Slack.

> In addition, we have started hosting weekly "office hours" for in-person (virtual) introduction and contributions to the code base.

Author: ```suggestion
In addition, we have started hosting weekly "office hours" for in-person (virtual) introduction and guided contributions to the code base.
```

By pairing new contributors with experienced signac developers, we significantly reduce the knowledge barrier to joining a new project.
Office hours creating space for users to make contributions has also led to more features and documentation born directly out of user need.

> Contributing to documentation has been a productive starting point for new users-turned-contributors, both for the users and the project, since it improves the users' familiarity with the API as well as addresses weak spots in the documentation more obvious to newer users.

Author: ```suggestion
Contributing to documentation has been a productive starting point for new users-turned-contributors, both for the users and the project, since it improves the users' familiarity with the API as well as addresses weak spots in the documentation that are more obvious to new users.
```

> We will share our project's experience in progressively revising project governance to catalyze sustained contributions of many kinds, adding more points of entry for learning about the project (Slack support, office hours), and participating in Google Summer of Code in 2020 as a NumFOCUS Affiliated Project.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

In our growth with increasing contributors and users, we recognized a need to change our governance structure to make contributing easier and provide a clear organizational structure to the community.
We based our new model on the Meritocratic Governance Model and our manager roles on Numba Czars.
We decided on a four category system with maintainers, committers, contributors, and users.

> Code review and PR merge responsibilities are granted to maintainers and committers, who are (self-)nominated and accepted by a vote of the project maintainers.

Author: ```suggestion
Code review and pull request merge responsibilities are granted to maintainers and committers, who are (self-) nominated and accepted by a vote of the project maintainers.
```

Contributors consist of all members of the community who have contributed in some way to the framework, which includes adding or refactoring code as well as filing issues and improving documentation.

> Finally, users refer to all those who use signac in any capacity.

Author: The definitions of contributors and users are somewhat obvious and I'm not sure if we need to state them for readers here.

Reviewer 2: I think we should mention them in some capacity since we define the other two even if it is to say `Contributors and users represent those who contribute to and use the framework in any capacity.`

Author: This is good enough for me. Resolving.

In addition, to avoid overloading our committers and maintainers, we added three rotating manager roles to our governance model that ensure project management goes smoothly: triage, community, and release.
These managers have specific rotation policies based on time (or release cycles).
The triage manager role rotates weekly and looks at new issues or pull requests and handles cleanup of outdated issues.
The community manager role rotates monthly and is in charge of meeting planning and outreach.
Lastly, the release manager rotates with each release cycle and is the primary decision maker for the timeline and feature scope of package releases.
This prevents burnout among our senior developers and provides a sense of ownership to a greater number of people, instead of relying on a "benevolent dictator/oligarchy for life" mode of project leadership.

Conclusions
-----------

From the birth of the signac framework to now, signac has grown in usability, performance, and use.

> Since our last proceedings papers, we have added exciting new features, like groups, aggregates, and synced collections and learned how to better manage outreach and governance in a burgeoning scientific open-source project.

Author: ```suggestion
In the last three years, we have added exciting new features, like groups, aggregation, and synced collections, while learning how to manage outreach and establish sustainable project governance in a burgeoning scientific open-source project.
```

As maintainers and committers, we are looking to continue expanding the framework through user-oriented development and continued outreach to research fields that routinely have projects suited for signac.
For example, extensions into experimental research labs are currently being sought after with an aim to provide the strong data management and providence signac provides into experimentalist communities.

Getting signac
--------------

The signac framework is tested for Python 3.6+ and is compatible with Linux, macOS, and Windows.
The software is available under the BSD-3 Clause license.

To install, execute

.. code-block:: bash

    conda install -c conda-forge signac \

>     signac-flow signac-dashboard

Author: We haven't mentioned dashboard at all before this installation section. I'm fine if we remove this for the sake of being consistent with what we've discussed above, but perhaps we should mention signac-dashboard briefly in the Overview of New Features.

Author: Discussed with @b-butler. I'm going to add a short paragraph to the Overview of New Features.

..   .. latex::
..      :usepackage: footmisc

:author: Bradley D. Dice
:email: bdice@umich.edu
:institution: Department of Physics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
:institution: These authors have an equal contribution to the work presented.

:author: Brandon L. Butler
:email: butlerbr@umich.edu
:institution: Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
:institution: These authors have an equal contribution to the work presented.

:author: Vyas Ramasubramani
:email: vramasub@umich.edu
:institution: Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

:author: Alyssa Travitz
:email: atravitz@umich.edu
:institution: TODO Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

:author: Michael M. Henry
:email: mikehenry@u.boisestate.edu
:institution: Micron School of Materials Science and Engineering, Boise State University

:author: Hardik Ojha

> :email: hojha@ee.iitr.ac.in
> :institution: TODO Department, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:email: hojha@ch.iitr.ac.in
:institution: Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee
```

.. code-block:: python

    from flow import FlowProject

    cpu_env = FlowProject.make_group(name="cpu")
    gpu_env = FlowProject.make_group(name="gpu")

    @cpu_env.with_directives({"np": 48})
    @gpu_env.with_directives({"ngpu": 4})
    # For the operation when not run through the cpu
    # or gpu group
    @FlowProject.operation.with_directives({"np": 4})
    def expensive_operation(job):
        # expensive computation for either
        # CPU or GPU here
        pass

Users also frequently work or want to work with multiple jobs within a singular repetitive task such as plotting.
Though the signac package has methods like ``Project.groupby``, which can generate subsets of the project that are grouped by a state point key, there has been no similar feature in signac-flow to allow operations to act on multiple jobs.
The concept of _aggregation_ provides a straightforward way for users to write and submit operations that act on arbitrary subsets of jobs in a signac data space.
Just as the groups feature acts as an abstraction over operations, aggregation can be viewed as an abstraction over jobs.

> The operation syntax changes from `def my_operation(job):` to `def my_operation(*jobs):`, using Python's argument unpacking syntax to support user input of one or more job instances while maintaining backwards compatibility.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The operations now have the ability to accept multiple job instances as positional arguments while maintaining backwards compatibility.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Operations now can accept multiple job instances as positional arguments though Python's argument unpacking while maintaining backwards compatibility.
```

Bundles allow users to leverage scheduler resources effectively and minimize queue time, and can be run in serial (the default) or parallel.
Users enable bundling by passing the command line argument ``--bundle``, optionally with another argument ``--parallel`` to run each command in the bundle in parallel (the Python API has corresponding options as well).
The simplest case of a bundle is a submission script with the same operation being executed for multiple jobs.
Bundling is what allows the submission script to contain multiple jobs executing the same operation.
By storing information about the generated bundles during submission, **signac-flow** prevents accidental resubmission just as in the unbundled case.
While the example above does not use either groups or aggregation, bundles works seamlessly with both.

Synced Collections: Backend-agnostic, persistent, mutable data structures
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Motivation
~~~~~~~~~~

At its core, **signac** is a tool for organizing and working with data on the filesystem, presenting a Pythonic interface for tasks like creating directories and modifying files.

> In particular, **signac** makes modifying the JSON files used to store the state points and documents as easy as working with Python dictionaries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In particular, **signac** makes modifying the JSON files used to store a job's state points and documents as easy as working with Python dictionaries.
```

> Despite heavily optimizing these APIs, in seeking to scale **signac** to ever-larger data spaces we quickly realized that the most significant barrier intrinsic to our model was the overhead of parsing and modifying large numbers of text files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite heavy optimization, when seeking to scale **signac** to ever-larger data spaces, we quickly realized that the most significant performance barrier was the overhead of parsing and modifying large numbers of text files.
```
```suggestion
Despite heavily optimizing these APIs, in seeking to scale **signac** to ever-larger data spaces we quickly realized that the most significant barrier intrinsic to our model was the overhead of parsing and modifying large numbers of text files.
```

Unfortunately, the usage of JSON files in this manner was deeply embedded in our data model, making switching to a more performant backend without breaking APIs or severely complicating our data model a daunting task.

> While attempting to overcome this hurdle, we identified a core problem that our current API for modifying JSON files was solving in a limited manner: namely, the creation of a dictionary-like interface to an underlying resource.

Reviewer: it's not clear what "this hurdle" is, especially since it's the start of a new paragraph.  Do you mean attempting to be less reliant on json files?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While attempting to overcome the code's ties to individual JSON files, we identified a core problem that our current API for modifying JSON files was solving in a limited manner: namely, the creation of a dictionary-like interface to an underlying resource.
```

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
While attempting to overcome the code's ties to individual JSON files, we identified a core problem in our current API. The modification of JSON files was solved in a limited manner: namely, the creation of a dictionary-like interface to an underlying resource.
```

Could we also break this sentence up?

Reviewer 2: The new format suggests that that there was a problem in a negative sense whereas before it was merely describing a domain of application namely interfacing to an underlying resource through a data-structure like approach.

Reviewer 6: How about something like:

```suggestion
While attempting to overcome the code's ties to individual JSON files, we identified a core problem in our current API for modifying JSON files. The problem was solved in a limited manner: namely, the creation of a dictionary-like interface to an underlying resource.
```

Author: I thought the hurdle was clear, but we can make it clearer. I rewrote it so that the tone is different as well.
```suggestion
While attempting to separate the **signac** data model from its original backend implementation (manipulating JSON files on disk), we identified a common pattern: providing a dictionary-like interface for an underlying resource.
```

> Numerous other well-known Python packages (h5py and Zarr immediately come to mind) also do this in order to make working with complex resources feel as natural as possible to Python users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Numerous other well-known Python packages (h5py and Zarr immediately come to mind) also use dictionary-like interfaces to make working with complex resources feel natural to Python users.
```

Most such packages implement this layer directly for their particular use case, but the nature of the problem suggested to us the possibility of developing a more generic representation of this interface.
Indeed, the Python standard library's ``collections.abc`` module is designed exactly for the purpose of making it easy to define objects that "look like" standard Python objects while having completely customizable behavior under the hood.
As such, we saw an opportunity to specialize this pattern for a specific use case: the transparent synchronization of a Python object with an underlying resource.

> The **synced collections** framework represents the culmination of our efforts in this direction, providing a generic framework within the interfaces of any abstract data type can be mapped to arbitrary underlying synchronization protocols.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **synced collections** framework represents the culmination of our efforts in this direction, providing a generic framework wherein the interfaces of any abstract data type can be mapped to arbitrary underlying synchronization protocols.
```
I think?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The **synced collections** framework represents the culmination of our efforts in this direction, providing a generic framework in which the interfaces of any abstract data type can be mapped to arbitrary underlying synchronization protocols.
```
Another option

Author: I prefer "upon wheretofore." Kidding. 😉

> In **signac** this framework allows us to hide the details of a particular file storage medium (like JSON) behind a dictionary-like interface, but it can just as easily be used for tasks like creating a set-like interface to an underlying extension type or wrapping a directory manager in a list-like interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In **signac**, this framework allows us to hide the details of a particular file storage medium (like JSON) behind a dictionary-like interface, but it can just as easily be used for tasks such as creating a set-like interface to an underlying extension type or wrapping a directory manager in a list-like interface.
```

> This section will offer a high-level overview of this framework and our plans for its use within **signac**, with an eye to potential users in other domains as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section will offer a high-level overview of this synced collections framework and our plans for its use within **signac**, with an eye to potential users in other domains as well.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section will offer a high-level overview of the synced collections framework and our plans for its use within **signac**, with an eye to potential users in other domains as well.
```

Summary of Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We designed synced collections to be flexible, easily extensible, and independent of **signac**'s data model.

> Most practical use cases for this framework involve an underlying resource that may be modified by any number of associated in-memory objects that behave like standard Python collections such as dictionaries or lists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most practical use cases for this framework involve an underlying resource that may be modified by any number of associated in-memory objects that behave like standard Python collections, such as dictionaries or lists.
```

> Therefore, all normal operations must be preceded by loading from this resource and updating the in-memory store, and they must be succeeded by a subsequent save to that resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, all normal operations must be preceded by loading from this resource and updating the in-memory store, and they must be succeeded by subsequently saving to that resource.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore, all normal operations must be preceded by loading from this resource and updating the in-memory store, and they must be succeeded by saving to that resource.
```

subsequently seems redundant given succeeded by

The central idea behind synced collections is to decouple this process into two distinct groups of tasks: the saving and loading of data from a particular resource backend, and the synchronization of two in-memory objects of a given type.
This delineation allows us to, for instance, encapsulate all logic for JSON files into a single ``JSONCollection`` class and then combine it with dictionary- or list-like ``SyncedDict``/``SyncedList`` classes via inheritance to create fully functional JSON-backed dictionaries or lists.

> Such synchronization has significant performance implications, so the framework also exposes an API to implement buffering protocols to collect operations into a single transaction before submitting them to the underlying resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Such synchronization has significant performance implications, so the framework also exposes an API to implement buffering protocols to collect operations into a single transaction before submitting them to the underlying resource.
```

"Implication" doesn't specify negative or positive

Reviewer 2: @atravitz this does not have a suggestion in it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Such synchronization significantly lowers performance, so the framework also exposes an API to implement buffering protocols to collect operations into a single transaction before submitting them to the underlying resource.
```

With the new framework, users can create fully-functional, arbitrarily nested ``JSONDict`` and ``JSONList`` objects that share the same logic for reading from and writing to JSON files.
Just as importantly, **signac** can now combine these data structures with a different backend, allowing us to swap in different storage mechanisms for improved performance and flexibility with no change in our APIs.
Since different types of resources may have different approaches to batching transactions --- for example, a SQLite backend may want to exploit true SQL transactions, while a Redis backend might simply collect all changes in memory and delay sending memory to the server --- synced collections also support customizable buffering protocols, again via class inheritance.

Applications of Synced Collections
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The new synced collections promise to substantially simplify both feature and performance enhancements to the **signac** framework.
Performance improvements in the form of Redis-based storage are already possible with synced collections, and as expected they show substantial speedups over the current JSON-based approach.

> We have also exploited the new, more flexible buffering protocol to implement and test alternatives to the previous approach, and in certain cases our new buffering techniques improve performance of buffered operations by 1-2 orders of magnitude.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have also exploited the new and more flexible buffering protocol to implement and test alternatives to the previous approach.
In certain cases, our new buffering techniques improve performance of buffered operations by 1-2 orders of magnitude.
```

Some of these performance improvements are drop-in replacements that require no changes to our existing data models, and we plan to enable these in upcoming versions of **signac**.

The generality of synced collections makes them broadly useful even outside the **signac** framework.
Adding Pythonic APIs to collection-like objects can be challenging, particularly when those objects should support arbitrary nesting, but synced collections enable nesting as a core feature to dramatically simplify this process.
Moreover, while the framework was originally conceived to support synchronization of an in-memory data structure with a resource on disk, it can also be used to synchronize with another in-memory resource.

> A powerful example of this would be wrapping a C or C++ extension type, for instance by creating a ``SyncedList`` that synchronizes with a C++ ``std::vector`` such that changes to either object would be transparently reflected in the other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A powerful example of this would be wrapping a C or C++ extension type, for instance by creating a ``SyncedList`` that synchronizes with a C++ ``std::vector``, such that changes to either object would be transparently reflected in the other.
```

With synced collections, creating this class just requires defining a conversion between a ``std::vector`` and a raw Python dictionary, a trivial task using standard tools for exposing extension types such as pybind or Cython.

At a higher level, synced collections represent an important step in improving both the scalability and flexibility of **signac**.

> By abstracting away details of persistent file storage from the rest of **signac**, they make it much easier for the rest of **signac** to focus on offering flexible data models for different situations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By abstracting away details of persistent file storage from the rest of **signac**, they make it much easier for the rest of **signac** to focus on offering flexible data models.
```

> One of the most common use-cases of **signac** is creating data spaces with homogeneous schemas that fit naturally into tabular data structures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the most common use cases of **signac** is creating data spaces with homogeneous schemas that fit naturally into tabular data structures.
```

> In future iterations of **signac** we plan to allow users to opt into such usage, which would enable us to replace file-based indexes with SQL-backed databases that would offer orders of magnitude in performance improvements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In future iterations of **signac**, we plan to allow users to opt into homogeneous schemas, which would enable us to replace file-based indexes with SQL-backed databases that would offer orders of magnitude in performance improvements.
```

> Using this flexibility we could also move away from our currently rigid workspace model to allow more general data layouts on disk for cases where users may benefit from the organizational benefits of more general folder structures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using this flexibility, we could also move away from our currently rigid workspace model to allow more general data layouts on disk for cases where users may benefit from more general folder structures.
```

The conceptual model of **signac-flow** builds on **signac**'s notions of the ``Project`` and ``Job`` (the unit of the data space) through a ``FlowProject`` class that adds the ability to define and execute operations (the unit of a workflow) that act on jobs.
Operations are Python functions or shell commands that act on a job within the data space, and are defined using Python decorator syntax.

.. code-block:: python

    # project.py
    from flow import FlowProject

    @FlowProject.operation
    @Flowproject.post.true("initialized")
    def initialize(job):
        # perform necessary initialize steps
        # for simulation
        job.doc.initialized == True

    if __name__ == "__main__":
        FlowProject().main()

When this project is run using **signac-flow**'s command line API (``python project.py run``), the current state point is prepared for simulation.
Operations can have preconditions and postconditions that define their eligibility.
All preconditions must be met in order for a operation to be eligible for a given job.

> If any postcondition is met, that indicates an operation is complete (and thus ineligible).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
If all postconditions are met, that indicates an operation is complete (and thus ineligible).
```

I thought all postconditions must be true for an operation to be complete. In the case I tried with multiple postconditions, if one postcondition is not met and one postcondition is met, then the operation still runs. Did I mistunderstand?

Reviewer: You're right Kelly (from the docs):
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/31974495/119712343-7d022e00-be2e-11eb-8ddc-88bfd983efdb.png)

For instance, with synced collections it becomes easy to define a new list-like type that automatically saves all its data in a plain-text CSV format.
However, the flexibility of this new framework extends far beyond that, defining a generic protocol that can be used to provide a dictionary, list, or set-like API to any arbitrary underlying data structure, including other in-memory objects that do not present a similarly Pythonic API.

Summary of Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We designed synced collections to be flexible, easily extensible, and independent of **signac**'s data model.
The central element is the ``SyncedCollection`` class, which defines a new abstract class extending the ``collections.abc.Collection`` from the Python standard library.
A ``SyncedCollection`` is a ``Collection`` that adds two additional groups of abstract methods that must be implemented by its subclasses.
One group includes methods for synchronizing with an underlying resource, while the other contains methods for synchronizing with a standard collection of the underlying base type.

> For instance, a ``JSONDict`` would implement the first set of methods to define how to save a dictionary to a JSON file and reload it, while it would implement the second set of methods to define how to convert between a ``JSONDict`` instance and a standard Python dictionary.

Reviewer 6: To the best of my understanding, users cannot directly interact with ``SyncedCollection`` and it's associated subclasses. The focus on implementation, rather than user experience, feels like a departure from the the rest of the paper's tone. Who is the target audience? - And how does this information benefit the target audience?

Depending on the target audience and their assumed skill level, I have a few more questions/comments.

Critically, these two sets of functions are orthogonal.
Therefore, it is possible to implement different backend types and different data structures independently, then combine them into concrete classes using multiple inheritance.
This solution is analogous to the way that language server protocols separate support for programming languages from support for editors, turning an :math:`M \times N` problem into a simpler :math:`M+N` problem.
In practice, our synced collections framework comes bundled with a set of backend classes, such as the ``JSONCollection``, and a set of data structure classes, such as the ``SyncedDict``.
Each of these inherits from ``SyncedCollection`` and implements a subset of its methods, but remains abstract until combined (via multiple inheritance) with a class implementing the remaining methods.
This design pattern makes defining the functional classes at the bottom of the hierarchy trivial.
For example, the ``JSONDict`` is implemented by inheriting from ``JSONCollection`` and ``SyncedDict``, but requires no additional code to function.

> Similarly, the ``JSONList`` class inherits from ``JSONCollection`` and ``SyncedList``.

Reviewer 6: This portion also has a heavy focus on implementation and seems more relevant to developers than casual users, whereas the rest of the paper seems to target casual users.

Moreover, while the framework was originally conceived to support synchronization of an in-memory data structure with a resource on disk, it can also be used to synchronize with another in-memory resource.
One powerful example of this would be the use of a synced collection to provide a Pythonic API to a collection-like data structure implemented as a C or C++ extension module that could function like a Python dictionary with suitable plumbing but lacks the standard APIs expected of such a class.
With the synced collections framework, creating a new class providing such an API is reduced to simply requiring the implementation of two straightforward methods defining the synchronization protocol.

Project Evolution
-----------------

The **signac** project has evolved from being an open-source project mostly developed and managed by the Glotzer Group at the University of Michigan, to being supported by over 30 contributors and 8 committers/maintainers on 3 continents and with over 55 citations from academic and government research labs and 12 talks at large scientific, Python, and data science conferences.

> The growth in involvement with **signac** is the result of our focus on developing features based on user needs, as well as our efforts to transition **signac** users to **signac** contributors, through many initiatives in the past few years.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The growth in involvement with **signac** results from our focus on developing features based on user needs, as well as our efforts to transition **signac** users to **signac** contributors, through many initiatives in the past few years.
```

Seemed a little wordy to me, but maybe it's just a difference in writing style.

Through encouraging users to become contributors, we ensure that **signac** addresses real users' needs.
We have expanded **signac**'s contributor base beyond the University of Michigan through research collaborations with other universities, sharing the framework at conferences, and through the Google Summer of Code (GSoC) program, which we applied to under the NumFOCUS organization.
Working with and mentoring students through GSoC led to a new committer and significant work on the synced collections and aggregation projects presented above.
To encourage code contributions from existing users, we maintain active support and discussion through Slack.
In addition, we have started hosting weekly "office hours" for in-person (virtual) introduction and guided contributions to the code base.
By pairing new contributors with experienced **signac** developers, we significantly reduce the knowledge barrier to joining a new project.

> Office hours creating space for users to make contributions has also led to more features and documentation born directly out of user need.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Office hours creates space for users to make contributions has also led to more features and documentation born directly out of user need.
```

> Office hours creating space for users to make contributions has also led to more features and documentation born directly out of user need.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Close interactions between developers and users during office hours has led to more features and documentation born directly out of user need.
```

Is this what this sentence meant?

different directives depending on how it is written.
If executed through ``cpu_group`` the operation will request 48 cores, if ``gpu_group`` 4 GPUs, if
neither then it will request 4 cores.
This represents the real use case where an user may want to run an operation locally (in this case
without a group), or on a CPU or GPU focused HPC/workstation.

.. code-block:: python

    from flow import FlowProject

    cpu_group = FlowProject.make_group(name="cpu")
    gpu_group = FlowProject.make_group(name="gpu")

    @cpu_group.with_directives({"np": 48})
    @gpu_group.with_directives({"ngpu": 4})
    @FlowProject.operation.with_directives({"np": 4})
    def expensive_simulate(job):
        # expensive simulation for running on either
        # CPUs or GPUs
        pass

Users also frequently work with multiple jobs when performing tasks such as plotting data from all jobs in the same figure.
Though the **signac** package has methods like ``Project.groupby``, which can generate subsets of the project that are grouped by a state point key, there has been no similar feature in **signac-flow** to allow operations to act on multiple jobs.

> The concept of aggregation provides a straightforward way for users to write and submit operations that act on arbitrary subsets of jobs in a **signac** data space.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Though the **signac** package has methods like ``Project.groupby``, which can generate subsets of the project that are grouped by a state point key, there has been no use of these "aggregation" features in **signac-flow** for defining workflows.
The concept of aggregation provides a straightforward way for users to write and submit operations that act on arbitrary subsets of jobs in a **signac** data space through functions analogous to ``Project.groupby``.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Though the **signac** package has methods like ``Project.groupby``, which can generate subsets of the project that are grouped by a state point key, there has been no way to use these "aggregation" features in **signac-flow** for defining workflows.
The concept of aggregation provides a straightforward way for users to write and submit operations that act on arbitrary subsets of jobs in a **signac** data space through functions analogous to ``Project.groupby``.
```

One of the most common use cases of **signac** is creating data spaces with homogeneous schemas that fit naturally into tabular data structures.
In future iterations of **signac**, we plan to allow users to opt into homogeneous schemas, which would enable us to replace file-based indexes with SQL-backed databases that would offer orders of magnitude in performance improvements.
Using this flexibility, we could also move away from our currently rigid workspace model to allow more general data layouts on disk for cases where users may benefit from more general folder structures.
As such, synced collections are a stepping stone to creating a more general and powerful version of **signac**.

Project Evolution
-----------------

The **signac** project has evolved from being an open-source project mostly developed and managed by the Glotzer Group at the University of Michigan, to being supported by over 30 contributors and 8 committers/maintainers on 3 continents and with over 55 citations from academic and government research labs and 12 talks at large scientific, Python, and data science conferences.

> The growth in involvement with **signac** results from our focus on developing features based on user needs, as well as our efforts to transition **signac** users to **signac** contributors, through many initiatives in the past few years.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The growth in involvement with **signac** results from our focus on developing features based on user needs, as well as our efforts to transition **signac** users into **signac** contributors, through many initiatives in the past few years.
```

Through encouraging users to become contributors, we ensure that **signac** addresses real users' needs.
We have expanded **signac**'s contributor base beyond the University of Michigan through research collaborations with other universities, sharing the framework at conferences, and through the Google Summer of Code (GSoC) program, which we applied to under the NumFOCUS organization.
Working with and mentoring students through GSoC led to a new committer and significant work on the synced collections and aggregation projects presented above.

> To encourage code contributions from existing users, we maintain active support and discussion through Slack.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To provide an open and helpful contributor and user community, we maintain active support and discussion through Slack
```

Author: Simplified:
```suggestion
We provide active support and open discussion for the contributor and user community through Slack.
```

..   .. latex::
..      :usepackage: footmisc

:author: Bradley D. Dice
:email: bdice@umich.edu
:institution: Department of Physics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
:institution: These authors have an equal contribution to the work presented.

:author: Brandon L. Butler
:email: butlerbr@umich.edu
:institution: Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
:institution: These authors have an equal contribution to the work presented.

:author: Vyas Ramasubramani
:email: vramasub@umich.edu
:institution: Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

:author: Alyssa Travitz
:email: atravitz@umich.edu
:institution: Macromolecular Science and Engineering Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

:author: Michael M. Henry
:email: mikehenry@u.boisestate.edu
:institution: Micron School of Materials Science and Engineering, Boise State University

:author: Hardik Ojha
:email: hojha@ch.iitr.ac.in
:institution: Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee

> :author: Kelly Wang

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
:author: Kelly L. Wang
```

.. class:: keywords

   data management, data science, database, simulation, collaboration, workflow, HPC, reproducibility

Introduction
------------

.. figure:: signac_overview.pdf
    :align: center
    :scale: 40 %
    :figclass: w

    Overview of the **signac** framework.
    Users first create a project, which initializes a workspace directory on disk.
    Users define state points which are dictionaries that uniquely identify a job.
    The workspace holds a directory for each job, containing JSON files that store the state point and job document.
    The job directory name is a hash of the state point's contents.
    Here, the ``init.py`` file initializes an empty project and adds one job with state point ``{"a": 1}``.
    Next, users define a workflow using a subclass of **signac-flow**'s ``FlowProject``.
    The workflow shown has three operations (simulate, analyze, visualize) that, when executed, produce two new files ``results.txt`` and ``plot.png`` in the job directory. :label:`overview`

Working examples of features presented in this paper can be found online at [#]_.

> .. [#] https://github.com/glotzerlab/signac-examples

Reviewer 5: Should we create a CNAME for this, like examples.signac.io ?

Author: I'm not sure, it seems like a redirect if anything: https://github.com/glotzerlab/signac-website/tree/master/_redirects

`signac.io/examples`

But I don't think we need to change this, our GitHub link should be stable over the long term.

Reviewer 5: I think it would be worthwhile to create that redirect, but I will leave it up to you.

The framework is a strong choice for applications meeting one or more of the following criteria:

- input/output data is primarily file-based
- prototype research code where data schemas may change or evolve
- computations will use an HPC cluster
- the amount of computation per job is large
- parameter sweeps over a range of values (with values on a grid or dynamically determined by e.g. active learning)
- heterogeneous data (not all jobs have the same keys present in their state points)

For example, M. W. Thompson *et al.* in :cite:`thompson.etal2019a` used 396 jobs/state points to execute computer simulations of room-temperature ionic liquids with GROMACS :cite:`pronk.etal2013,lindahl.etal2001,hess.etal2008,abraham.etal2015a` simulations.
The study investigated 18 compositions (by mass fraction) and 22 unique solvents from five chemical families (nitriles, alcohols, halocarbons, carbonyls, and glymes), with a state point for each pairing of mass fraction and solvent type.

> Users working with large tabular data (e.g. flat files on disk or data from a SQL database) may prefer to use libraries like pandas, dask, or RAPIDS that are specifically designed for those use cases.

Reviewer 5: Should we cite any of these libraries?

Author: @b-butler is going to work on this. Here's one for RAPIDS: https://rapids.ai/citations.html

Reviewer 2: They are cited now, and I wish I had saw your citation link earlier @bdice. I should have checked my notifications. I found that one anyways :smiley:

Reviewer 5: Thanks @b-butler !

This paper will focus on developments to the **signac** framework over the last 3 years, during which features, flexibility, usability, and performance have been greatly improved.
The core data structures in **signac** have been overhauled to provide a powerful and generic implementation of "synced collections," that we will leverage in future versions of **signac** to enable more performant data indexing and flexible data layouts.
In **signac-flow**, we have added support for submitting groups of operations with conditional dependencies, allowing for more efficient utilization of large HPC resources.
Further developments allow for operations to act on arbitrary subsets of the data space, or "aggregates," rather than single jobs alone.
Moving beyond code development, this paper will also discuss the scientific work these features have enabled and the organizational developments from key partnerships and affiliations with scientific software initiatives and organizations such as MoSDeF and NumFOCUS.

> We will share our project's experience in progressively revising project governance to catalyze sustained contributions of many kinds, while adding more points of entry for learning about the project (Slack support, weekly public office hours), and participating in Google Summer of Code in 2020 as a NumFOCUS Affiliated Project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will share our project's experience in continuously revising project governance to encourage sustained contributions, adding more entry points for learning about the project (Slack support, weekly public office hours), and participating in Google Summer of Code in 2020 as a NumFOCUS Affiliated Project.
```
editing for clarity

Applications of signac
----------------------

The **signac** framework has been cited 51 times, according to Google Scholar, and has been used in a range of scientific fields with various types of computational workflows.
Some of these studies include quantum calculations of small molecules :cite:`govoni.etal2018`,
4,480 simulations of epoxy curing (each containing millions of particles) :cite:`thomas.etal2018`,
inverse design of pair potentials :cite:`adorf.etal2018`,
identifying photonic band gaps in 151,593 crystal structures :cite:`cersonsky.etal2021`,
benchmarking atom-density representations for use in machine learning :cite:`musil.etal2021`,
simulating fluid flow in polymer solutions :cite:`howard.etal2019`,
design of optical metamaterials :cite:`harper.etal2020`,
and economic analysis of drought risk in agriculture :cite:`rodziewicz.etal2020`.

> Much of the published research using **signac** comes from chemical engineering, materials science, or physics, the home fields of many of **signac**'s core developers and thus fields where the project has had greater exposure.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Much of the published research using **signac** comes from chemical engineering, materials science, or physics, the fields of many of **signac**'s core developers and thus fields where the project has had greater exposure.
```

> In addition to social factors such as the "home field advantage," materials research commonly requires large HPC resources with shared file systems, a use case where **signac** excels.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Computational materials research commonly requires large HPC resources with shared file systems, a use case where **signac** excels.
```

Many **signac** projects have 100 to 10,000 jobs, with each job workspace containing arbitrarily large data sizes (the total file size of the job workspace has little effect on the speed of the **signac** framework).
Some users that primarily wish to leverage **signac-flow**'s workflows for execution and submission may have a very small number of jobs (< 10).
One example of this would be executing a small number of expensive biomolecular simulations using different random seeds in each job's state point.
Importantly, projects with a small number of jobs can be expanded at a later time, and make use of the same workflow defined for the initial set of jobs.
The abilities to grow a project and change its schema on-the-fly catalyze the kind of exploration that is crucial to answering research questions.

The workflow submission features of **signac-flow** interoperates with popular HPC schedulers including SLURM, PBS/TORQUE, and LSF automating the generation and submission of scheduler batch scripts.

> Directives are set through Python function decorators and define resource and execution requests for operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Directives are set through Python decorators and define resource and execution requests for operations.
```

Examples of directives include number of CPUs or GPUs, the walltime, and memory.
The use of directives allows **signac-flow** workflows to be portable across HPC systems by generating resource requests that are specific to each machine's scheduler.

Overview of New Features
------------------------

The last three years of development of the **signac** framework have expanded its usability, feature set, user and developer documentation, and potential applications.

> Some of the largest architectural changes in the framework will be discussed in their own sections, namely extensions of the workflow model (support for executing groups of operations and aggregators that allow operations to act on multiple jobs) and a much more performant and flexible re-implementation of the core "data structure" classes that synchronize **signac**'s Python representation of state points and job documents with JSON-encoded dictionaries on disk.

Reviewer 5: Did that particular refactorization actually lead to significant performance increases? 😕

Author: Sort of. The optimizations that I did for signac 1.5 / 1.6 were also incorporated into the design of synced collections. There was some amount of optimization work happening concurrently in the existing code and synced collections, so the performance of synced collections is similar to the optimized "original" code in signac 1.6 but both are significantly faster than signac <= 1.4.

Reviewer 5: Ok, the re-implementation then includes both the synced-collections and some other refactorizations.

Reviewer 4: @bdice @csadorf just so you're both fully aware, here's a more thorough overview of the performance implications of various changes:
- Many lazy-loading-related changes happened concurrently with synced collections, so those performance numbers are mixed in a bit.
- All core operations on the new `JSONDict` based on synced collections are 1.5-3x faster than operations on the old `JSONDict` depending on the operation (mostly from #453, but also a few other PRs).
- `JSONDict` creation is about 1.5x slower with the new class simply because it has many more attributes created on construction, e.g. for thread-safety and because we no longer use `contextlib.contextmanager` but instead create contexts on construction (which pays off quickly if we operate on the object). 
- The new buffered mode I implemented in #462 is dramatically faster than the old buffered mode on fast file systems (1-2 orders of magnitude), but is not yet enabled on signac master. I plan to make a PR to change that soon.

The upshot is that for the purpose of signac-flow the synced collections-based `JSONDict` is marginally slower than the old `JSONDict` at present (without the new buffering enabled) because creating objects is the most common operation and we rarely modify them, just loop over all jobs. For user workflows it will depend a lot on how people use the objects, but in most cases synced collections should be faster. However, as Bradley says all the other optimizations that happened made it so that the end result was still faster than previous releases in all cases.

Note: one way in which we can substantially speed things up further would be to remove attribute-based access to state point/document elements, but that's a non-starter in the short to intermediate term.

..
    TODO: include a graph of performance from 1.0 to now

Similarly, performance enhancements were also made in the **signac-flow** package.
Some of the optimizations identified include lazy evaluation of run commands and directives, and caching of job status information.
In addition, the improvements in **signac** such as faster iteration over large **signac** projects used in **signac-flow** made **signac-flow**'s primary functions — checking project status, executing operations, and submitting operations to a cluster — significantly faster.

Improved User Output
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Workflow graph detection:**
The preconditions and postconditions of operations in a **signac-flow** ``FlowProject`` implicitly define a graph. For example, if the operation "analyze" depends on the operation "simulate" via the precondition ``@FlowProject.pre.after(simulate)``, then there is a directed edge from "simulate" to "analyze."
This graph can now be detected from the workflow conditions and returned in a NetworkX compatible format for display or inspection.

**Templated status output:**

> Querying the status of a **signac-flow** project now has many options controlling the information displayed and has been templated to allow for raw, Markdown, or HTML output. In doing so, the output has also become cleaner and compatible with external tools.

Reviewer 5: What does "raw" mean in this context? JSON-formatted?

Author: Good catch. This means "plain text" for the terminal display, I believe. I'll adjust:
```suggestion
Querying the status of a **signac-flow** project now has many options controlling the information displayed and has been templated to allow for plain text, Markdown, or HTML output. In doing so, the output has also become cleaner and compatible with external tools.
```

Enhanced Workflows
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Directives:**

> Directives provide a way to specify required resources on HPC schedulers such as number of CPUs/GPUs, MPI ranks, OpenMP threads, walltime, memory, and others. Directives can be a function of the job as well as the operation, allowing for great flexibility. In addition, directives work seamlessly with operation groups, job aggregation, and submission bundling (all of which are described in a later section).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Execution directives (_short_ directives) provide a way to specify required resources on HPC schedulers such as number of CPUs/GPUs, MPI ranks, OpenMP threads, walltime, memory, and others. Directives can be a function of the job as well as the operation, allowing for great flexibility. In addition, directives work seamlessly with operation groups, job aggregation, and submission bundling (all of which are described in a later section).
```

Executing complex workflows via groups and aggregation
------------------------------------------------------

.. figure:: signac-flow_aggregation-groups-bundling.pdf
    :align: center
    :scale: 90 %
    :figclass: w

    Aggregation, groups, and bundling allow users to build complex workflows.
    The features are orthogonal, and can be used in any combination.
    Aggregation enables one operation or group to act on multiple jobs.
    Groups allow users to combine multiple operations into one, with dependencies among operations resolved at run time.
    Bundling helps users efficiently leverage HPC schedulers by submitting multiple commands in the same script, to be executed in serial or parallel. :label:`workflow`

Two new concepts in **signac-flow** provide users with significantly more power to implement complex workflows: groups and aggregation.

> A third concept bundling is also involved in providing flexibility to users in their workflows, but

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A related third concept – bundling – which is not new, also provides flexibility to users in their workflows, but exclusively affects workflow execution, not definition.
```

Author: Nice improvement. I prefer this slight change to the end of the sentence, I'll apply this change instead.
```suggestion
A related third concept – bundling – which is not new, also provides flexibility to users in their workflows, but exclusively affects scheduler submission, not workflow definition.
```

> on the execution not definition side.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

```

Operations can have preconditions and postconditions that define their eligibility.
All preconditions must be met in order for a operation to be eligible for a given job.
If any postcondition is met, that indicates an operation is complete (and thus ineligible).
Examples of such conditions include the existence of an input file in a job's workspace or a key in the job document (as shown in the above snippet).
However, this type of conditional workflow can be inefficient when sequential workflows are coupled with an HPC scheduler interface, because the user must log on to the HPC and submit the next operation after the previous operation is complete.
The desire to submit large and long-running jobs to HPC schedulers encourages users to write large operation functions which are not modular and do not accurately represent the individual units of the workflow, thereby limiting **signac-flow**'s utility and reducing the readability of the workflow.

Groups, implemented by the ``FlowGroup`` class and ``FlowProject.make_group`` method, allows users to combine multiple operations into a single entity that can be run or submitted.

> Submitting a group allows **signac-flow** to dynamically resolve preconditions and postconditions of operations as each operation is executed, making it possible to combine separate operations (e.g. for simulation and analysis and plotting) into a single submission script with the expectation that all will execute despite the dependencies between operations.

Reviewer 5: I am not sure what is meant by "despite the dependencies" in this context?

Author: Without groups, there would be no way to submit all of the operations together. That is, if operation B's preconditions are met by (and thus "depend on") operation A, operation B cannot be submitted at the same time as operation A. Groups solve this problem by allowing the dependencies to be resolved at runtime: submit a group with both A and B; operation A will run first and then operation B. Does that make sense? How should we say that?

Reviewer 6: Maybe something like
```suggestion
Submitting a group allows **signac-flow** to dynamically resolve preconditions and postconditions of operations as each operation is executed, making it possible to combine separate operations (e.g. for simulation and analysis and plotting) into a single submission script that will execute eligible operations in sequence.
This allows users to write smaller, modular functions, which may require a specific order of execution, without sacrificing the ability to submit large, long-running jobs on HPCs.
```
Would something in this vein be more clear?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Submitting a group allows **signac-flow** to dynamically resolve preconditions and postconditions of operations as each operation is executed, making it possible to combine separate operations (e.g. for simulation and analysis and plotting) into a single submission script with operations becoming eligible and run within the same submission.
In this case, a job may start off unsimulated and end up plotted even though plotting depends on analyzing and analyzing on simulating.
```

Author: I prefer @klywang's suggestion and will apply that.

Furthermore, groups are aware of directives and can properly combine the directives of their constituent operations to specify resources and quantities like walltime whether executing in parallel or serial.

.. code-block:: python

    from flow import FlowProject

>     new_group = FlowProject.make_group(name="new_group")

Reviewer 5: Is "new_group" really the best name for an example?

Reviewer 2: No it isn't I have changed it to `example_group`.

    @new_group.with_directives(
        {"ngpu": 2,
         "walltime": lambda job: job.doc.hours_to_run})
    @FlowProject.post.true("simulated")
    @FlowProject.operation
    def simulate(job):
        # run simulation
        job.doc.simulated = True

    @new_group
    @FlowProject.pre.after(simulate)
    @FlowProject.post.true("analyzed")
    @FlowProject.operation

>     def analzye(job):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    def analyze(job):
```

        # analyze simulation results

>         job.doc.analzyed = True

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        job.doc.analyzed = True
```

Groups also allow for specifying multiple machine specific resources (CPU or GPU) with the same operation.
An operation can have unique directives for each distinct group to which it belongs.
By associating an operation's directives with respect to a specific group, groups can represent distinct compute environments, such as a local workstation or a remote supercomputing cluster.
The below snippet shows an ``expensive_simulate`` operation which can be executed with three
different directives depending on how it is written.
If executed through ``cpu_env`` the operation will request 48 cores, if ``gpu_env`` 4 GPUs, if
neither then it will request 4 cores.
This represents the real use case where an user may want to run an operation locally (in this case
without a group), or on a CPU or GPU focused HPC/workstation.

.. code-block:: python

    from flow import FlowProject

    cpu_env = FlowProject.make_group(name="cpu")

>     gpu_env = FlowProject.make_group(name="gpu")

Reviewer: is there a reason the name is different than the variable name here?

Reviewer 2: not really... actually the name is a bit confusing.

Reviewer 2: I changed the name to something I think to be more descriptive.

    @cpu_env.with_directives({"np": 48})
    @gpu_env.with_directives({"ngpu": 4})
    @FlowProject.operation.with_directives({"np": 4})
    def expensive_simulate(job):
        # expensive simulation for running on either
        # CPUs or GPUs
        pass

Users also frequently work with multiple jobs when performing tasks such as plotting data from all jobs in the same figure.
Though the **signac** package has methods like ``Project.groupby``, which can generate subsets of the project that are grouped by a state point key, there has been no similar feature in **signac-flow** to allow operations to act on multiple jobs.
The concept of aggregation provides a straightforward way for users to write and submit operations that act on arbitrary subsets of jobs in a **signac** data space.

> Just as the groups feature acts as an abstraction over operations, aggregation can be viewed as an abstraction over jobs.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Just as the _groups_ feature acts as an abstraction over operations, _aggregation_ can be viewed as an abstraction over jobs.
```

Reviewer 2: Do you think we should italicize all occurrences of groups and aggegation/aggregates?

Author: I would like to italicize the first occurrence of the terms, but I'm not sure what @csadorf has in mind.

Reviewer 5: I would be in favor italicizing those words whenever they refer to the **name** of the associated feature rather than the general concept on all occurrences. This means that "aggregation" would be italicized in many cases, but "aggregates" would not.

Reviewer 2: If we do this, then we should likely italicize `synced collections` too.

Author: I went through and made these changes in 36a8cb3a8d83867.

    @aggregator
    @FlowProject.operation
    def plot_enzyme_activity(*jobs):
        import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
        import numpy as np

        x = [job.sp.temperature for job in jobs]
        y = [job.doc.activity for job in jobs]
        fig, ax = plt.subplots()
        ax.scatter(x, y)
        ax.set_title(
            "Enzymatic Activity Across Temperature")
        fig.savefig("enzyme-activity.png")

Like groups, there are many reasons why a user might wish to use aggregation.
For example, a **signac** data space that describes weather data for multiple cities in multiple years might want to plot or analyze data that uses ``@aggregator.groupby("city")`` to show changes over time for each city in the data space.
Similarly, aggregating over replicas (e.g. the same simulation with different random seeds) facilitates computing averaged quantities and error bars.
Another example is submitting aggregates with a fixed number of jobs in each aggregate to enable massive parallelization by breaking a large MPI communicator into a smaller communicator for each independent job, which is necessary for efficient utilization of leadership-class supercomputers like OLCF Summit.

> Finally, bundling is another way to use workflows in conjunction with an HPC scheduling system.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Finally, _bundling_ is another way to use workflows in conjunction with an HPC scheduling system.
```

> Whereas aggregates are concerned with jobs and groups operations, bundling is concerned with combining what are effectively units of execution into a single submission script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whereas aggregates are concerned with jobs and groups operations, bundling is concerned with combining executable units into a single submission script.
```

Once developed, however, such an API would abstract out enough of the internals of **signac** to enable other generalizations as well, such as making it relatively easy to support alternate (and nearly arbitrary) data space layouts.

The synced collections subpackage of **signac** represents the culmination of our efforts to expose this functionality, providing a generic framework within which interfaces corresponding to any of Python's built-in types can be easily constructed with arbitrary underlying synchronization protocols.
For instance, with synced collections it becomes easy to define a new list-like type that automatically saves all its data in a plain-text CSV format.
However, the flexibility of this new framework extends far beyond that, defining a generic protocol that can be used to provide a dictionary, list, or set-like API to any arbitrary underlying data structure, including other in-memory objects that do not present a similarly Pythonic API.

Summary of Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> We designed synced collections to be flexible, easily extensible, and independent of the rest of **signac**.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We designed synced collections to be flexible, easily extensible, and independent of **signac**'s data model.
```

Finally, users refer to all those who use **signac** in any capacity.

In addition, to avoid overloading our committers and maintainers, we added three rotating manager roles to our governance model that ensure project management goes smoothly: triage, community, and release.
These managers have specific rotation policies based on time (or release cycles).
The triage manager role rotates weekly and looks at new issues or pull requests and handles cleanup of outdated issues.
The community manager role rotates monthly and is in charge of meeting planning and outreach.
Lastly, the release manager rotates with each release cycle and is the primary decision maker for the timeline and feature scope of package releases.
This prevents burnout among our senior developers and provides a sense of ownership to a greater number of people, instead of relying on a "benevolent dictator/oligarchy for life" mode of project leadership.

Conclusions
-----------

From the birth of the **signac** framework to now, **signac** has grown in usability, performance, and use.

> In the last three years, we have added exciting new features, like groups, aggregation, and synced collections, while learning how to manage outreach and establish sustainable project governance in a burgeoning scientific open-source project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the last three years, we have added exciting new features such as groups, aggregation, and synced collections, while learning how to manage outreach and establish sustainable project governance in a burgeoning scientific open-source project.
```

> As maintainers and committers, we hope to continue expanding the framework through user-oriented development, reach users in research fields beyond materials science that routinely have projects suited for **signac**, and welcome new contributors with diverse backgrounds and skills to the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We hope to continue expanding the framework through user-oriented development, reach users in research fields beyond materials science that routinely have projects suited for **signac**, and welcome new contributors with diverse backgrounds and skills to the project.
```

> Getting signac

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Installing signac
```

--------------

The **signac** framework is tested for Python 3.6+ and is compatible with Linux, macOS, and Windows.
The software is available under the BSD-3 Clause license.

To install, execute

.. code-block:: bash

    conda install -c conda-forge signac \
    signac-flow signac-dashboard

or

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install signac signac-flow signac-dashboard

Source code is available on GitHub [#]_ [#]_ and documentation is hosted online by ReadTheDocs [#]_.

.. [#] https://github.com/glotzerlab/signac
.. [#] https://github.com/glotzerlab/signac-flow
.. [#] https://docs.signac.io/

Acknowledgments
---------------

> We would like to thank Kelly Wang for contributing the concept and content of Figure :ref:`overview`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
since Kelly is a co-author now

> We would also like to thank NumFOCUS, whose staff have provided the **signac** project with helpful advice on open-source governance, project sustainability, and community outreach.

Reviewer 5: Logo?

(TODO: Acknowledgments are incomplete.)
B.D. is supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Grant DGE 1256260.
M.M.H is supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1835593.

> A.T. was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1707640.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A.T. is supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1707640.
```

Synced Collections: Backend-agnostic, persistent, mutable data structures
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Motivation
~~~~~~~~~~

At its core, **signac** is a tool for organizing and working with data on the filesystem, presenting a Pythonic interface for tasks like creating directories and modifying files.
In particular, **signac** makes modifying the JSON files used to store a job's state points and documents as easy as working with Python dictionaries.
Despite heavy optimization, when seeking to scale **signac** to ever-larger data spaces, we quickly realized that the most significant performance barrier was the overhead of parsing and modifying large numbers of text files.
Unfortunately, the usage of JSON files in this manner was deeply embedded in our data model, making switching to a more performant backend without breaking APIs or severely complicating our data model a daunting task.

While attempting to overcome this hurdle, we identified a core problem that our current API for modifying JSON files was solving in a limited manner: namely, the creation of a dictionary-like interface to an underlying resource.

> Numerous other well-known Python packages (h5py and Zarr immediately come to mind) also use dictionary-like interfaces to make working with complex resources feel natural to Python users.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Numerous other well-known Python packages (_e. g._ h5py and Zarr) also use dictionary-like interfaces to make working with complex resources feel natural to Python users.
```

Reviewer 2: I am fine with the suggestion, but I don't think that e.g. is supposed to be italicized even if it is from a Latin phrase.
```suggestion
Numerous other well-known Python packages (e.g. h5py and Zarr) also use dictionary-like interfaces to make working with complex resources feel natural to Python users.
```

Author: Adapted with citations in 8d27b167.

Most such packages implement this layer directly for their particular use case, but the nature of the problem suggested to us the possibility of developing a more generic representation of this interface.

> Indeed, the Python standard library's ``collections.abc`` module is designed exactly for the purpose of making it easy to define objects that "look like" standard Python objects while having completely customizable behavior under the hood.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Indeed, the purpose of the Python standard library's ``collections.abc`` module is to make it easy to define objects that "look like" standard Python objects while having completely customizable behavior under the hood.
```

As such, we saw an opportunity to specialize this pattern for a specific use case: the transparent synchronization of a Python object with an underlying resource.

The **synced collections** framework represents the culmination of our efforts in this direction, providing a generic framework within the interfaces of any abstract data type can be mapped to arbitrary underlying synchronization protocols.

> In **signac**, this framework allows us to hide the details of a particular file storage medium (like JSON) behind a dictionary-like interface, but it can just as easily be used for tasks such as creating a set-like interface to an underlying extension type or wrapping a directory manager in a list-like interface.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
In **signac**, this framework allows us to hide the details of a particular file storage medium (like JSON) behind a dictionary-like interface, but it can just as easily be used for tasks such as creating a new, list-like interface that automatically saves all its data in a plain-text CSV format.
```

> but it can just as easily be used for tasks such as creating a set-like interface to an underlying extension type or wrapping a directory manager in a list-like interface

These examples seemed a little abstract. The previous example with CSV files was easier to understand because it used an extension and data type that were common and familiar. Was there a specific reason for replacing the previous example with more general ones?

Reviewer 2: I think to mention that sets could effectively be added easily.

Reviewer 6: Ah, is that something that is normally harder to do?

Author: I would be fine with dropping the `set` example but I do like the concreteness of CSV. Feels more tangible than a directory manager.
